a 1'Europe pour vous estimer." 	1
aaain take ^ Argyll and the prior of St. Andrew's instantly de- 	1
abandon, presented to the view of the Scots two objects 	1
abated, and openly avowed by her; that she rejected 	1
abated old animosities, and prepared both people for 	1
abate her bigotry. Her prejudices might wear off gra- 	1
abate that indignation with which the multitude were 	1
a battle, an army, without pay, and with little discipline, 	1
abbeys which conferred a title to a seat in parliament, 	1
abbot, if he had been so fortunate as to embrace the 	1
abbot of Paisley. 	1
Abercorn. That of the earl, composed chiefly of bor- 	1
abilities and political address, was received with little 	1
abilities as the most powerful supports of her authority. 	1
abilities, superior to those of James the third, and of 	1
abilities, were two of the most ancient and powerful 	1
able ; and an indulgent legislature ought not unneces- 	1
able ; and, as traitors, I banish you from my presence 6 ." 	1
able and ill-judged breach of public faith ; which she 	1
able ; and, perhaps, no one could have been permitted 	1
able as all these acts were to the reformation, some bishops, ' whose ardent 	1
able, both as causes and effects of that dominion which 	1
able ; but the king's rage was implacable and unrelent- 	1
able collection of original papers, in two large volumes. 	1
able construction her conduct would be liable, if she 	1
able, divides them towards the east ; on the west they 	1
abled them to face their enemies in the field. But 	1
able effusion of fanaticism which they wished to banish 	1
able esteem and amity. 	1
able for one prince to receive pay from another, under 	1
able interval to pass unimproved; he procured the con- 	1
able. It may be ascribed, in some degree, to the dex- 	1
able merit, who adopted all their sentiments, and de- 	1
able part of their body, whether we consider it with 	1
able power. Under the present circumstances, any 	1
able project. The queen of Scots was the only inno- 	1
able proof of their not having loaded their sovereign 	1
able resolution which religious fervour could inspire. 	1
able sum of money, and engaged to support the king's 	1
able to comply with the request s . At the same time, 	1
able to confirm their charge by sufficient proof, it 	1
able to contend u . The return of the earl of Bothwell, 	1
able to deliver it to him whose right should be found 	1
able to reduce his ideas to practice ; he was governed 	1
able to the doctrine of the reformation, that the parliament which met De- 	1
able to their sovereign, than honourable to himself q . 	1
ably abated the veneration which they were accustomed 	1
ably impaired during his banishment. His vassals, while 	1
abounding in complaints of the lukewarm and languid 	1
about an accommodation of the differences r . 	1
about, beseeching the soldiers to spare their country- 	1
about the effect of J$ie act, April the nineteenth, 1567- I in- 	1
about thirty were killed, above a thousand were taken prisoners ; and 	1
About this time he began to be conspicuous by the 	1
About this time the French seem to have had some design of reviving 	1
About this time the license of the borderers called 	1
About this time the protestant church of Scotland Establish- 	1
About this time the queen made her public entry Sept. 1. 	1
about this time to cast her eyes upon another subject 1554. 	1
above mediocrity ; he could die, but could not digest a 	1
above the other nobles, in the reign of his father, aug- 	1
a brave nobility chose rather to die than to desert their 	1
abruptly denied her the liberty of worshipping God in 	1
absence, on account of the shortness of the time, which 	1
absolutely, to direct the motions of Darnly, who was 	1
absolved by Mary's incurable attachment to Bothwell, 	1
absurdities. 	1
absurdity, or experience of their pernicious tendency, 	1
a Buchan. 385. Crawf. Mem. 124. Cabbala, 171. 	1
abundance, and is almost inexhaustible. A fixed tax 	1
abundantly justified, during the late commotions. A 	1
abundantly justify the conduct of the queen's ministers, 	1
a Burn. Hist. Ref. 3. Append. 278. 	1
academical education formerly commenced at a much 	1
acceptable to both sides: Argyll and the prior, who 	1
acceptable to him than beneficial to both kingdoms, 	1
acceptable to the deity. This indulgence, to which the 	1
acceptable to the English. 	1
accepted the invitation which Mary gave her, to stand 	1
accepting it, but that he would owe it entirely to his ma- 	1
accession of James the sixth to the crown of England. 	1
accession of strength, he could expect no better success 	1
Accession The tragical and untimely death of the French mo- 	1
accession to the regency, the queen had kept in her 	1
access to her. In this solitary state, without a counsel- 	1
access to the king. James, at the same time, became 	1
accidental eruption of popular rage '. 	1
accidental fire, reduced the French to extreme distress 	1
accident, broke out with fatal violence. A private 	1
acclamations of joy, and with every demonstration of 	1
accommodation ; while, at the same time, she, by studied 	1
accompanied with some suitable actions. But this pro- 	1
accomplices found means to steal the keys out of his 	1
accomplished of the French nobility, who had attended 	1
accomplishing her design, with all the impatience na- 	1
accomplishment of that design which she had twice 	1
accomplishments. The impression which lord Darnly 	1
accomplishments, together with the favourable circum- 	1
accordingly I thought it my duty to find out an able hand 	1
Accordingly, that form of popery which prevailed in 	1
according to custom, from different parts of the king- 	1
According to the rules of succession which are now 	1
account. 	1
accountable to the confederate lords for any part of her 	1
account for them ; and, regulating her own opinions by ~ 	1
account, into their hands. The lord chancellor was the 	1
account of this event. It struck Elizabeth, at first, in 	1
accounts for the indignation of the nobles, when they 	1
account, to hope that you have not fixed the accession of 	1
accusation ; nor could she, who was their nearest kins- 	1
accusation of her subjects, if they should be so despe- 	1
accusations. On the contrary, Murray and his as- 	1
accusation, which so directly attacked Mary's reputa- 	1
accuse her ; in defending herself she laboured under 	1
accuse him of being accessory to the murder of the 	1
accuser of his own sovereign r . The candour which 	1
accustomed to a government, where the power of the 	1
accustomed to regard collegiate education as the inter- 	1
accustomed vigour. The government of England had 	1
a certain number of 'representatives,' to appear in their 	1
achieved, his majesty thinketh verily, and so all we, ye shall find this 	1
acknowledge that the crowns of England and Ireland 	1
acknowledge the king's authority. The queen's ad- Scotland. 	1
a complete series of our laws supplies the defects of our 	1
A considerable body of her French forces, who were 	1
A considerable majority declared for the treaty, and the 	1
a conversation at Allan Ramsay's house, which Boswell 	1
a conviction that the acquirement of true knowledge 	1
A copy of the History of Charles the fifth was sent 	1
A cordial reconcilement with Elizabeth was another Attempts to 	1
a court of justice to be held on the borders, the inhabitants of no less than 	1
acquainted Leicester and Cecil, that as their mistress 	1
acquainted with the intrigues of both the British courts, asserts, upon 	1
acquainted with the learning and controversies of the 	1
acquaint Mary, that, as she herself would consider such 	1
acquiesced in the repeal as quietly as our brethren in 	1
acquiesce. Your best apology at present is, that you could 	1
acquired such an increase of wealth, by the spoils of 	1
acquisition of church lands would have been of no less 	1
acquisition of such talents as shed lustre on the writer 	1
acquitted, as sufferers in a good cause; and in order to screen 	1
acquitting Bothwell, the earl of Caithness protested, in 	1
a Crawf. Peer. 297. b Buch. 334. 	1
a crown was at stake, such nice disputes and subtilties 	1
acting in concert with the king, they not only would 	1
action as the public accusation of his sovereign. Mary 	1
action is seldom mentioned. Conscious on both sides, 	1
actions inconsistent with the duty of a subject. His 	1
actions may be imputed to those passions, though the 	1
actions void and illegal. At the same time, an associa- May a. 	1
actions, which may now be related with equal propriety. 	1
action, than by the soft light of social virtue ; and Mr. 	1
action than discourse, a warlike people always hasten 	1
action, the most unadvised, as well as the most unfor- 	1
action which called for repentance ; even then he talks 	1
act is apparent, and it is drawn with great art. This art is peculiarly mani- 	1
active in promoting the reformation, had, under various 	1
active leaders of the congregation, performed, by their 	1
active scene in which Robertson had an opportunity 	1
act passed in the last parliament of Mary, settling the refor- 	1
acts of parliament. Besides the entertainment and instruc- 	1
acts of power was to search the city of Edinburgh 	1
acts of the Scottish parliament in confirmation of the 	1
acts of violence were common; or the mean condition of 	1
act was far from amounting to a legal establishment of 	1
act with too much vigour, the authority annexed to that 	1
act with violence ; and in an age, when religious pas- 	1
A.D. 121. the difficulty of defending such a distant frontier, con- 	1
A.D. 421. Their long residence in the island had polished, in 	1
A.D. 81. the Roman authors. When the Romans, under Agri- 	1
a dangerous experiment. Her court would become a 	1
a day appointed for their trial x . 	1
added greatly to the probability of the accusation, and 	1
added. Privileges of great importance were granted 	1
added reciprocally to each other's strength. Together They aim 	1
added so much lustre to their cause. 	1
added strength to the party, and gave it a regular and 	1
added to a family already opulent and powerful. On 	1
added to the anguish of mind she had suffered on Both- 	1
added to the violence and promptitude of their resolu- 	1
additional security in the exercise of their religion. 	1
additional security of such importance, that it was pub- 	1
additions to Cecil's collection ; and from this magazine, 	1
addressed to him about this time by sir Gilbert Elliot, 	1
addressed to that order of men. To abandon usurped 	1
add to the inheritance transmitted to them from their 	1
a debate on this delicate subject, which could not fail 	1
a degradation she would deem this alliance, which 	1
a design of undermining him, and of opening to herself 	1
a design was formed against his life. Keith, App. 108. He was required 	1
adhered to him, were assembled at Stirling, to delibe- 	1
adherents, animated with zeal for religion, and eager to 	1
adherents u . They now appeared openly in arms ; and, 	1
adieu to her mourning attendants, with a sad heart, 	1
A difficulty hath been started with regard to the acts The validity 	1
a disagreeable demand *. Zealous as the first reformers 	1
a disputed and dubious succession, a motion was made, 	1
adjusted; nor was it possible that a scheme so deep- 	1
administer the sacraments, or qualification to take the 	1
administration fell into the hands of a young queen, not 	1
administration, it was impossible that the commotions 	1
administration of civil affairs, are virtues which even 	1
administration of government was abandoned, without 	1
Admiralty, January 20th, 1759. 	1
admiral, were all hereditary; and in many counties, the 	1
admission of the representatives of the lesser barons, the preserving their 	1
admission, without the effusion of blood. 	1
admitted into Elizabeth's presence, and received by 	1
admitted into her presence ; even the ambassadors of 	1
admitted so near the throne. Full of the same ideas, 	1
admitted to an audience, she had so far recovered the 	1
adopted were soon visible. The time of the proroga- J^ 	1
advance her own pretensions to the English crown. 	1
advance towards the confederates. Their troops were 	1
advancing the title and pretensions of their niece, the 	1
advantage of external form, when accompanied with no 	1
advantage of his associates. The earl of Bothwell, by which is in- 	1
advantage of the distress of the adverse party, eluded 	1
advantageous as any transaction in her reign. Mary 	1
advantages from a cessation of arms, she also agreed to 1559. 	1
advantages of healthful air to recommend it ; but, on 	1
advantage, spread fast through the nation, and excited 	1
advantages which Mary would obtain by this treaty, 	1
advantage they had gained ; the prospect of victory re- 	1
adventures. He was the son of a musician in Turin, 	1
Adventurous as Bothwell's project to gain the queen 	1
adversaries, however desperate, would not venture to 	1
advertisements of the great division that is at this present within the realm 	1
advice of physicians, and that she herself could attend 	1
advice to the queen by Melvil is utterly inconsistent with Camden's asser- 	1
advisable to remove her to some place at a greater 1568. 	1
advised prince, brought into parliament, besides the 	1
a faction, rather than the history of their country. 	1
a false step which they took, presented to theni, at 	1
a favour for Morton and his associates, of which they 	1
a few battering cannon, would now reduce in a few 	1
A few days after, Arran came to Knox, and, with 	1
A few days after the baptism of the prince, Morton, 	1
A few days after the conclusion of the treaty, both 	1
A few days after the dissolution of parliament, four 1553. 	1
A few days before the retreat of the congregation, Maitiand 	1
a few days had exhausted the forage and provision of 	1
a few of her courtiers, as a prisoner to his castle of 	1
A few of the members of this society associated for 	1
affable. She possessed great sensibility of temper, and 	1
affairs by will ; and the right of administration, in that 	1
affairs entirely to protestants. Her council was filled administra- 	1
affairs of Scotland, which would, in all probability, have ~~ 	1
affairs of Scotland, wrote instantly to Mary, advised her 	1
affairs. She was pleased to see the pride of the 	1
affected, and to the lovers of innovation. Though 	1
affected by a publication in London. I was exceedingly sorry 	1
affected subjects: that if the measure were persisted 	1
affection, and possessed all the power, as well as repu- 	1
affection and respect uniformly paid him by his pa- 	1
affection in Scotland, and had seduced from the regent 	1
affection of her subjects f , the firmest foundation of a 	1
affection of the nobles, with the danger of an after- 	1
affection ; so that his only hope of success was in sur- 	1
affections, she conducted herself, however, with such 	1
affection, throne. But the qualities of his mind corresponded ill 	1
affection upon a few mean persons, of professions so 	1
affect, without reason, to represent this as an idle rumour. 2. The question 	1
affirm that the balance which ought to be preserved tban in any 	1
afford a striking example of the boldness and freedom 	1
afforded no colourable pretext for a general rebellion. 	1
afforded the catholics a more avowed protection than 	1
afforded the protestant religion, was merely temporary, 	1
afforded to the generality of ministers. To a few three 	1
affords many memorable instances of deviations from 	1
afford them more effectual aid. One of Maitland's at- 	1
a flattering distinction, and both would concur in re- 	1
a foreign country must have heen highly dishonourable 	1
a former period, in recommending to him the History 	1
a friend. 	1
after all this preparation, calmly expected the regent's 	1
after Darnly's arrival in Scotland, she, in return to 	1
after deliberation, to stop his publication, and I was obliged to 	1
After gaining a point of such difficulty, with so much Dec. 1551. 	1
after having left the kingdom in one thousand five hun- 	1
after its publication in this country, printed at Paris. 	1
After many delays, which served to heighten the 	1
after mounted the throne of France p . 	1
after murdered there in the most cruel manner. All 	1
After plundering the adjacent country, the richest and 	1
after stating his own conviction of the equity, if not of 	1
after that I shall begin the other, which was my first 	1
after that marriage which had cost him so many crimes 	1
After the attention of both nations had been fixed so 	1
after the burial of the king, whose body was deposited 	1
after the death of Mary, persuaded his daughter-in-law, 	1
After the loss of Perth, the queen endeavoured to 	1
After the publication of these last volumes, which extend 	1
After the symptoms of fear discovered by her fol- 	1
After this discovery of Mary's sentiments, at 	1
afterwards approve of that horrid action. Her attach- 	1
afterwards archbishop and cardinal of Sens, a furious 	1
again appear with safety at their head. There was 	1
again into Scotland. The first and last of these were 	1
again perusing your works in their most improved state ; and 	1
again resumed; and they were enabled, by possessing 	1
against 	2
Against all these the protestants remonstrated, with the 	1
against any future attempt from the same quarter. At 	1
against Bothwell, the nobles published a declaration 	1
against Elizabeth ; and that, by this unexampled se- 	1
against England had been undertaken without neces- 	1
against England, she listened with pleasure to these 	1
against federates advanced to meet her. They found her 	1
against for the future with the utmost care. As the 	1
against her; and if this should be the result of the 	1
against her. laid the matter before the privy council, and it was 	1
against her, seems to be the most probable motive of 	1
against his sovereign, on which she could found an 	1
against it ; and I have the satisfaction to think, that I 	1
against Kirkaldy of Grange, and some of his accom- 	1
against Lennox in the year one thousand five hundred 	1
against Mary, whom for many reasons she both envied 	1
against popery was written by an episcopal clergyman. 	1
against precipitately to Newcastle, having thus changed situ- 	1
against Rizio, wrote an account of it some short time 	1
against the banished lords, she summoned them, by 	1
against the episcopal church, and were even proceeding 	1
against the governor, saying, that he hath coloured a peace with your ma- 	1
against the incursions of banditti. 	1
against their ancient enemies bestowed on them the lat- 	1
against their right foot, and the other against the enemy breast-high ; their 	1
against The malecontents had not yet openly taken up arms' 1 . 	1
against the marriage, and conjured the queen, on his knees, to lay aside all 	1
against the marriage happened before those made by Melvil himself, 157. 	1
against them, or the conspirators durst not shed the 	1
against them, they were driven to the last extremity. 7. 	1
against the person of their sovereign. 	1
against this evil, by preventing the return of those 	1
against this, the queen regent; nor did they hesitate a moment, 	1
against ture, and more suited to the spirit of the age. Darnly, 	1
against which she had long struggled. Elizabeth's 	1
against you. 	1
again; that this would require time, and it was uncertain 	1
again to Eli- sources were all exhausted, and their destruction ap- 	1
age, and in less time than two months, a part of the 	1
age, and of a temper, to feel the full power of these j}"^ t n s 	1
age, and the merits of the saints, were the topics on 	1
age astonish and shock us ; the vices of our own become 1566. 	1
age, began, and in a single reign almost completed, the 	1
age had then ascended the throne, their consternation 	1
age; he gave judgment, however, upon all points in 	1
age, it is easy to observe the different characters of the 1560. 	1
agents in different parts of the kingdom, alarmed Eliza- 	1
agents on a flexible temper, counterbalanced several of 	1
age of our history commences. From thence the regular se- 	1
age on the honour and character of the nation. 	1
ages, the vassals of the kings of France ; and, in con- 	1
age, to sacrifice all private and particular passions to 	1
age, what they are in the present, one of the most po- 	1
agitated with that furious and unmerciful zeal which is 	1
ago, to repeal the act for naturalizing the Jews, in con- 	1
a gracious reception in her court, and their spirit of 	1
a great measure, to Murray, who had directed her ad- 	1
A great part of their revenue was spent upon mul- 	1
agreeable. On the one hand, the confirmation of his 	1
agreeable to herself. It was easy for them to seize the 	1
agreeable to them, consented, under their present cir- 	1
agreeable to the queen. But, at the same time, as her 	1
agreed to a cessation of arms for eight days, and be- 	1
agreed to regulate his future proceedings in that king- 	1
agreed with my transient residence in my native country. I 	1
agree in acknowledging the authority of any common 	1
Agrees that by no means unreasonable. Mary, deceived by this 	1
aid from any other quarter. But with Elizabeth and 	1
aid, which the duke so basely purchased at the price of 	1
aim at diminishing the exorbitant power and wealth of 	1
aimed at applying this rule, which takes place in pri- 	1
aimed at establishing the protestant doctrine on the 	1
aimed at nothing but securing Elizabeth's protection to 	1
aim to persuade, but only to amuse Mary h . Almost 	1
air, and the pleasure of rural objects and a beautiful 	1
air, which majesty itself can scarce render tolerable. 	1
a Keith, 269. &gt; Ibid. 259. 261. 266. 	1
a Keith, 419. 446. 449. Melv. 167. See Appendix, No. XXII. 	1
a king should possess a great revenue; nor did the 	1
a knight ; another, when his eldest daughter was mar- 	1
Alarmed at a remonstrance, delivered in so firm a 	1
alarmed at their approach, and discovered no inclina-~~ 	1
alarmed Murray, or were influenced by his example to 	1
alarmed the duke of Somerset, who saw his danger, 	1
alarmed the whole city. The inhabitants ran to the 	1
alarm the duke of Chatelherault. Haynes, 215. 219. Forbes's Collect, 	1
Albany, on pretext that an attempt had been made to 	1
Albany's lands and honours were, at length, restored to 	1
aldy, and began to move along the coast towards St. 	1
a leader, operated with less effect. Nothing can equal 	1
Alexander, duke of Albany, and John, earl of Mar, the 	1
alienated. During his long absence the name of king 	1
alienations still remain q . The nobles, with the concur- 	1
a little to the power and independence of the nobility. 	1
all, a national enthusiasm inspired by such a cause, baf- 	1
all and sundry needs and causes pertaining to the commons in the parlia- 	1
all blessings, the knowledge of truth. At that time 	1
All Bothwell's past crimes were enumerated, all his 	1
all companies, which began to be allowed to women, 	1
all destined for the church, where they could be placed 	1
all doubt, that many zealous papists thought the alliance with England to 	1
allegations of her enemies, in which she denied, in the 	1
alleged did not amount to a proof of guilt, but only of 	1
allegiance of subjects seemed to be fully preserved. 	1
allegiance which he owed his sovereign. On her arrival 	1
all Europe; and, even in that age, which was accus- 	1
All her gentleness could not bridle his imperious and 	1
all her influence to her uncles, the princes of Lorrain, 	1
all her past and subsequent misfortunes, she was uni- 	1
all her transactions with regard to Scotland in some 	1
all his interest, was now the most active instrument in 	1
all hopes of victory in any struggle desperate. Nor were 	1
alliance of the Scottish nation with France, and revive 	1
alliance so illustrious. Scotland, by its situation, threw 	1
alliance which had been concluded. In the one period, 	1
alliance with England firm and indissoluble. Among 	1
Allied so nearly to the throne, by the marriage of their 	1
all most zealous protestants, were themselves growing 	1
all of them animated with implacable hatred to Murray, 	1
all over Europe were exorbitant ; but Scotland was one 	1
all over the kingdom in defence of private property 	1
all over the kingdom, the weight and authority of laws. 	1
all over the north. These were destined to second and 	1
allowed access to the queen; she was excluded from 	1
allowed, but to be reckoned honourable. 	1
allowing his lady's claim upon the earldom of Angus to 	1
allow me the use of them. You know better what books to 	1
allow me 'to explain some visionary designs which sometimes 	1
all pretensions to a treaty of marriage with the queen of 	1
all probability, have been the first kingdom in Europe 	1
all rights to crown lands, hereditary offices, regalities, 	1
all the attempts of his enemies. 	1
all the gates. While the queen was at supper with 	1
all the intelligence in his power . The duke himself 	1
all their cavils 6 . The dispute stood, at that time, on a 	1
all their expeditions into foreign countries, whether to- 	1
All their subsequent transactions had contributed to 'and. 	1
all the rights pertaining to the husband of a queen 	1
all the scenes of her life : she was devoted too, with 	1
all these advantages, no doubt; and, in secret, they 	1
All these circumstances render the truth of both conspiracies probable. 	1
all the secrets of the cabinet, and put upon a level 	1
all, the security, the dignity, and the power of a favou- 	1
all these passions to the utmost extreme. The cruelty 	1
All these were cast down or burnt. Haynes, 52. As the Scots were no 	1
All this attention and panegyric was at first oppressive to 	1
all together in one house. The lesser barons, though 	1
All who leaned to the ancient opinions in religion 	1
all who professed the true religion, or were concerned 	1
all who would submit to the king's government to the 	1
ally divided into three distinct governments, bestowed 1566. 	1
ally k . Whatever apprehension Elizabeth might enter- 	1
Almost all the ancient nobility had perished, and 	1
almost all the barons of chief note in the army, forcibly 	1
almost every considerable cause, whether civil or crimi- 	1
almost every person of distinction in the kingdom, whe- 	1
almost forgotten. After his flight from the confede- 	1
almost impossible that any one could write such a style ex- 	1
almost obliged to retire with infamy 8 . 	1
almost the same footing whereon it now stands in that 	1
Almost the whole order of bishop&amp;, and several of the 	1
alone obliged one prince to grant to another, Elizabeth M^ry a safe- 	1
alone remaining subjected to the insolence and exac- 	1
alone were properly qualified for the trust. Almost all 	1
along the eastern borders to Dunbar. 	1
a long time. A few days after, he wrote to Mary, and 	1
already described, and which rendered the nobles so 	1
already enriched with the spoils of the church, and 	1
already established in Scotland, and confirmed by par- 	1
already reestablished, became careless of military dis- 	1
also a panegyric dictated to him. Nothing could more sur- 	1
also mentioned his intentions of translating Smollett, I gave 	1
also will not displease you) of expressing presently my 	1
alteration happened there; our kings could neither ex- Scotland!" 1 	1
altered. Keith, 310. 	1
altering the order of regal succession ; and even so late 	1
alternately, and in their proper places, he added every 	1
although himself a strict presby terian, was always ready 	1
altogether this scheme of the English history, in which I had 	1
altogether unjustifiable. 	1
altogether unknown ; in place of these were substituted 	1
alty of the Munroes, Frazers, Mackintoshes, and some 	1
always be most interesting to me;) and it gives me real con- 	1
always consider her as a queen, we must sometimes 	1
always diminishes in proportion to the increase of its 	1
always found it impracticable to subdue the mutinous 	1
always in a posture of defence, the form of government 	1
always regarded the remains of the stoical philosophy ; 	1
a majority of voices, and acquiesced in even by the 	1
a manner as added greatly, in appearance, to its num- 	1
a martial people, unacquainted with the arts of peace, 	1
a match to be a breach of the personal friendship in 	1
a matter of difficulty. The popish ecclesiastics, sepa- 	1
amazing credulity with respect to rumours of this kind, 	1
amazing. The only obstruction he met with was from 	1
ambassadors, and prepared for the vigorous defence of 	1
ambassadors, remonstrated against the infamy of such 	1
ambassadors, that Elizabeth had given them no encou- 	1
Ambassa- In consequence of the treaty of Edinburgh, as well 	1
ambition. 	1
ambition, exists so naturally in all inquiring minds, and 	1
ambition of that prelate could, at this time, be no ob- 	1
ambition of the princes of Lorrain, who, at that time, 	1
ambition. The demolition of the monasteries having 	1
ambition, the English queen, by her indiscreet zeal, pr 	1
ambition. Various causes of disgust subsisted between 	1
Ambitious The ambition of the princes of Lorrain had been no 	1
a measure no less prudent than popular. " An action 	1
a meeting of parliament. The act of forfeiture passed 	1
America and of New Zealand. Indeed you have made 	1
a method of defence. The barons, whose estates lay 	1
am grateful for the opportunity with which you furnish me of 	1
Amidst all her other cares, Mary was ever solicitous An exiraor- 	1
Amidst so many surprising events, the affairs of the Church 	1
Amidst the noise and danger of civil arms, these 	1
amidst these is the natural seat of freedom and inde- 	1
Amidst these struggles, the influence, which our The extra- 	1
amidst the shock of civil commotions, the earls of 	1
amine and to resolve this nice problem, concerning the 	1
a moment, the wise and pacific resolutions which they 	1
a moment, what was so deeply rooted ; or to strip the 	1
among a fierce people, have been pursued with less 	1
among all orders of men, who daily loaded the priest- 	1
among foreigners than acceptable to her own subjects. 	1
among many protestants of that age with incredible 	1
among others. For this reason, the behaviour of their 	1
among princes these expressions of friendship are com- 	1
among strangers, who had never been witnesses of his 	1
among subjects devoted to her interest, until her party, 	1
Among the few acts of that parliament to which Mary 	1
Among the great and independent nobility of Scot- 	1
among their own relations, and, by granting ' feus' and 	1
among them, a hundred and fifty persons of condition. Vol. ii. 286. The 	1
among them, and drew from them a promise to bury 	1
among the monarchs of Scotland, in a private but de- 	1
among the most powerful subjects in the kingdom, and 	1
among themselves bonds of confederacy and mutual de- 	1
among them, to which I found it necessary to appeal as 	1
Among them we find several who had been present in 	1
among the necessary arts of government, and even 	1
among the people at large, but even among the pres- 	1
Among the Scottish nobility, some hated the persons, 	1
among the writers of his country, and towards exem- 	1
among those in the higher ranks of life, scruples with 	1
a more remote source, which, in order to clear the sub- 	1
a mother. 	1
A motive, which cannot be justified, rendered the 	1
amount of their revenues, must be attended to, and 	1
ample authority ; and the king, whose jurisdiction once 	1
ample of his ancestors, with regard to Scotland. He 	1
amples of his enemies, gave him a higher idea of its 	1
am the only private person (as far as I know) in Scot- 	1
amuse and entertain this illustrious guest ; and in all 	1
amuse them, and to gain time. They ventured, how- 	1
amusing Mary, and eluding the solicitations of the 	1
an absolution from the pope, and a pardon in parlia- 	1
An accom- Le Croc, the French ambassador, who was in the 	1
an accommodation ; and that the matter would seem to 	1
An accusation so improbable gained but little credit. 	1
an acquaintance with the liberal arts ; and, at a time of 	1
an action, and represented the surrendering the queen 	1
an advantage, which, under her management, must have 	1
An adversary, so formidable as Knox, would not have 	1
an advice from her met with still less regard". 	1
an affair which had so long engrossed her heart and 	1
an affection so disproportionate to his merit, that, in the 1564. 	1
an alliance with Philip of Spain, in order to get revenge; 	1
An ambitious and high-spirited prince could not 	1
an angry leader of a faction, to govern a divided people 	1
a narrow country ; the fleet could only furnish a scanty 	1
an astonishing relaxation in domestic morals. Such 	1
an audience, until they had meanly consented to ac- 	1
ance. 	1
ance agree in representing him as one who fulfilled all 	1
ance and dignity. Impatience, resentment, indignation, 	1
ance, and intent upon the English succession, the great 	1
ance c . 	1
ance in this quarrel, and served him with no cordial 	1
ance of a confidence merely political, he insinuated, 	1
ance of an army, he was obliged to call in the assistance 	1
ance of her good offices ; with regard to the latter, she 	1
ance of his power, depended on Elizabeth. By favour- 1568 - 	1
ance on the half of my income ; for there is no place where 	1
ance on this theatre, a question was much agitated 	1
ance or succession might accrue to it, in free gift upon 	1
ances, but, as a preliminary toward settling the nation, 	1
ances of decency and respect towards their superiors, 	1
ances, that the Scottish queen had no design of mar- 	1
ancestors, but none to diminish it, time alone, by means 	1
ancestors had often dreaded, but could never subdue, 	1
ance was frequently of consequence to the contending 	1
ance was made. If we believe some historians, they 	1
ance, which the Scots undertook to join with all their 	1
ance with her demands ; and if that princess had been so 	1
ance without his advice 1 . By complaisance and assi- 	1
ance with your request, I shall, without preamble or apology, 	1
ancient, but ill-founded system. The vigilance and ad- 	1
ancient family, and, by his extensive possessions and 	1
ancient kings. 	1
ancient paper, is a folly to which, in every age, antiquaries are extremely 	1
ancient preeminence. They seemed, however, to enter 	1
and, above all, the interposition of the young queen, 	1
and, above all, the severe injunction of celibacy, had 	1
and above an hundred barons, who, though of the lesser 	1
and abrupt in handling it. I believe you go contrary to re- 	1
and absolute authority, rendered him the natural guar- 	1
and accompanied by a few retainers, as desperate as 	1
and accuracy in Mr. Wight's Inquiry into the Rise and Progress of Par- 	1
and accustomed to consider their own modes as the 	1
and actions, endeavoured to express an uncommon af- 	1
and address, than bodily vigour. Wherever the former 	1
and affection, to which he sacrificed the friendship of 	1
and, after an absence of nine years, David returned from 	1
and, after many obstacles, arising from the opposition 	1
and all his acquisitions, however fatal to the body of 	1
and all his crew were taken prisoners. His name and 	1
and all the other conspirators against Rizio, obtained 	1
and all who had been members of the congregation, 	1
and almost absolute. James did not suffer this favour- 	1
and alterations of any importance shall be published sepa- 	1
and although at first left in an inconsiderable minority, 	1
and ambassador, by their liberality and promises, gained 	1
and among these some persons of distinction. The pro- 	1
AND AN APPENDIX 	1
and annulled. Keith, 570 572. It deserves to be remarked, that, favour- 	1
and appointed by the express command of the king and 	1
and apt to consider those who disputed her will, as 	1
and arbitrary monarch had divorced or beheaded four 	1
and ardour astonishing in so young a person; Mr. 	1
and ardour. On the first rumour of an insurrection, 	1
and are thoroughly interested, they express themselves 	1
and as all the queen's actions were, at this juncture, 	1
and as France easily consented to withdraw those forces 	1
and, as it would have been improper to offend her; she 	1
and as the object of puritanic oppression ; he had never 	1
and, as the queen was looking daily for the arrival of a 	1
and at a distance from court; they gained credit, as 	1
and attacked both the doctrine and discipline of the 	1
and attentive as the queen regent. With her usual 	1
and, at that time, the most warlike part of the kingdom, 	1
and, at the same time, a fleet of sixty ships appeared 	1
and, at the same time that they returned their verdict 	1
and a zealous defender of the established religion. He 	1
and Balnaves of Hallhill, two eminent civilians, George 	1
and barons, who succeeded them, were masters of ter- 	1
and, being contrived and executed by sixteen persons only, cannot, with 	1
and, being enfranchised by the sovereign, a place in 	1
and, being still feeble and incapable of bearing fatigue, 	1
and betrayed Norfolk with a baseness unworthy of a 	1
and bigoted patrons of the catholic superstition, made 	1
and bigotry of the Austrian family, suppressed these 	1
and bishops, was made to correspond with the various 	1
and Bothwell, May 14. Good. vol. ii. 61. 3. That he sat in council with 	1
and Bothwell with great consternation. They were no 	1
and by abolishing that order of men, the former indulged 	1
and, by declaring her dissatisfaction with Mary's con- 	1
and by his expostulation with the queen, which Ruthven mentions, to have 	1
and by others out of avarice, it easily bore down the 	1
and, by rashly entering a public protestation against it, 	1
and, by their means, had excited such discord and 	1
and Carlisle. The ambition of succeeding emperors 	1
and charges all and sundry earls, lords, barons, freeholders, landed-men, 	1
and chief men of her party pronounced all these trans- 	1
and childishly shun every thing that forces them to 	1
and chimerical project. This, however, the queen at- 	1
and colonel Irwin, in which the former said that he 	1
and concern, and considered him as a rival, who had 	1
and condemned as heretics. Influenced by these con- 	1
and confederacies, they laboured to unite their party 	1
and confirmed Huntly's suspicions. Sir John Gordon, 	1
and consisted of an equal number out of each estate, 	1
and consulted by all Europe ; as a proficient in natural 	1
and contains their exploits from the 2d of July to the 17th of November. 	1
and continuing in that station, till the conclusion of 	1
and corruptions which had crept into the public wor- 	1
and countenanced by the example of their ancestors, 	1
and courted his people, dictated from that time to the 	1
and covered with the infamy attending an accusation of 	1
and crafty. While the success of the lords of the con- 	1
and criminal design, as to gain an absolute ascendant 	1
and cunning were great checks to the reformation. 	1
and daily threatened to put it into execution y . 	1
and declared, by her own proclamation, to be of force 	1
and defend the doctrines, discipline, and government 	1
and dependence, was an indecency equally repugnant 	1
and dependents of the house of Hamilton, and other 	1
and depriving the commissaries of all authority h . 	1
and despising them, parliaments were not held in the 	1
and destructive revolutions which these occasioned, 	1
and dethroned their queen, and, without shedding a 	1
and detrimental to the public. 	1
and difficulty. No minister ever entered more deeply 	1
and discipline of the church, the nobles kept pace with 	1
and dismissed them gently. One Scottish ship they detain, as vehemently 	1
and do homage to the English monarch, to renounce 	1
and, dreading the king's return, as the extinction of 	1
and drew others into the plot. On Sunday, the second 	1
and dry writer, the latter a copious and florid one, and 	1
and during the inactive season of the year, it was agreed 	1
and eagerly listened to in both houses, for addressing 	1
and effectual redress, as the injuries of one queen de- 	1
and Elizabeth did not desire, to make any farther pro- 	1
and Elizabeth, who had attempted so openly to obstruct 	1
and Eliza- that treaty had been executed by both parties with a 	1
and endeavoured to apply it to the right of succession 	1
and endeavoured to rouse the inhabitants of that city 	1
and endured all the fatigues of war with admirable for- 	1
and engaged in wars at a distance. Numerous armies 	1
Anders. Diplomat. Scotiae, p. 80, 81. from which it appears, that this com- 	1
Anders, vol. i. 36. Idem, vol. ii. 156. u Idem, vol. i. 38. 	1
Anders, vol. i. 94. 99. It would have been no small advantage to Mary, 	1
Anders, vol. iv. 125. f See Appendix, No. XXVII. 	1
Anders, vol. iv. 36. 70. 92. 	1
Anders, vol. iv. 56. 60. 	1
and especially the merchants, into such a rage and fury, that the whole 	1
and even his tyranny, by depressing the ancient nobi- 	1
and even to withhold his assent. Darnly had not only 	1
and every advantage which the. dependent kingdom 	1
and every other concession which was detrimental to 	1
and examples in scripture, that it was lawful for sub- 	1
and excite them to new acts of violence ; they hoped 	1
and expectants, who have an extreme sagacity in dis- 	1
and expressed his astonishment at seeing a man of so ~~ 	1
and expressed, with the utmost bitterness, her sense of 	1
and eyes bathed in tears, Mary left that kingdom, the 	1
and familiarly with the queen in public. He equalled 	1
and feared by each of the contending parties ; both 	1
and feeble mind. Our author was probably more 	1
and feebleness would have afforded him advantages 	1
and fens, and rivers, set bounds to despotic power, and 	1
and fidelity and personal service promised on the other 1 . 	1
and firmness, which its importance so well merited. 	1
and fled into France. Concern for the king's honour, 	1
and formidable. Nor did they want instruments for 	1
and, for the same reason, an avowed enemy to the doc- 	1
and fortunes in his defence. They recommended him 	1
and forty-five was repealed, and he was publicly restored 	1
and forty-nine: This step was taken in consequence of 	1
and forty-three, the complaints of the nation were better 	1
and fostered by the warmth of many a summer, rises 	1
and Francis having united, not long after, against the 	1
and from the known character of the princes of Lorrain, 	1
and from the Scotch church of Campvere in Holland. 	1
and from which the Scots dreaded no dangerous con- 	1
and gaiety of a polite court, she still fondly lingered in 	1
and gaiety of her court, which was filled with the_ most ~ 	1
and governed by the same maxims, had considerably 	1
and gracefulness of person he surpassed all his contem- 	1
and grandeur with those of the prime nobility ; and he 	1
and greater probability of success. They beheld, with 	1
and groaned under extreme poverty, fair words and 	1
and had been a witness to the intrepid and unconquer- 	1
and had frequently solicited him, by ambassadors, to 	1
and had it in charge to watch all its motions. Dangers 	1
and, had not a sudden death, occasioned by the splinter 	1
and happiness of kingdoms, in those situations where 	1
and happiness of life by marriage ; he united himself to 	1
and happy days of their union, he imputed this cold- 	1
and hated. 	1
and haughty prelate. 	1
and have been agitated with great warmth. Since the first publication of 	1
and have been unsuccessful in my application for one to some 	1
and, having accompanied the Piedmontese ambassador 	1
and having invited three of their superintendents to 	1
and hazard their lives and goods in her highness's service, against all ene- 	1
and he himself unacquainted with fear, he proceeded 	1
and held, like fiefs, by hereditary right. A person 	1
and Henry the second, the licentiousness of the military 	1
and hereditary enemy of the house of Hamilton ; and, 	1
and her husband, to assume the title of king and queen the title of 	1
and her return into her own kingdom seemed to be an 	1
and he, who had formerly submitted to his parliaments, ~~ 	1
and high-spirited people, and who, of all nations, can 	1
and his adherents 11 . 	1
and his adherents were restored to the estates and ho- 	1
and his family, the queen happened to set out on a pro^ 	1
and his followers was, therefore, the only event which 	1
and his heart warm ; the former capable of great im- 	1
and his kinsmen the Hamiltons, had conspired to mur- 	1
and his party, containing an enumeration of their trea- 	1
and his person is treated with great veneration. No 	1
and his zeal for the safety of the prince, overcame, on 	1
and how much they were willing to bear. Their pa- 	1
and humanity. Being conscious how detestable the 	1
and Huntly, being left alone, was at last obliged to lay April 16. 	1
and I fear that a black cloud is gathering in Ireland. 	1
and, if found invalid, should be dissolved by a legal 	1
and, if we may believe Knox, he publicly continued to 	1
and ignominious flight. The dread, of the present 	1
and impartiality had been, in any degree, equal to the 	1
and, impatient of any delay, and unrestrained by any 	1
and impetuosity. The liberty of the Scottish queen 	1
and impetuous people, until that critical and mature 	1
and impetuous temper, sufficiently account for his un- 	1
and importance. They meditated schemes of conquest, 	1
and in 1762 he was chosen principal of the university of 	1
and inactivity of the nobles, while the king was pro- 	1
and in a plentiful country, the queen resolved to fix the 	1
and in catechising the youth of his parish. 	1
and in compliance to the queen they passed an act, con- 	1
and inconstancy alienated from him such of the nobles 	1
and increased its violence. The simplicity of that age 	1
and independent, but as feudatory to the other, a treaty 	1
and independent. The reign of Henry the eighth pre- 	1
and industry. 	1
and in every enterprise his arms were crowned with 	1
and inflamed his private resentment. His kinsmen, the 	1
and inflexible perseverance which has ever been pecu- 	1
and influence lay, resided there in a kind of princely 	1
and in his name to usurp the government ; by others 	1
and in order to forward her designs, had hazarded their 	1
and in order to preserve them from the worst of all 	1
and in order to vindicate her innocence ; and so long as 	1
and in power; and the advantageous situation of his 	1
and in presence of the chancellor and other judges, 	1
and interested both nations, exist no longer, a question 	1
and interest of their sovereign, they employed every 	1
and interests of men, were arts with which he was ut- 	1
and in the mean time she was busy in considering the 	1
and intrigue and refinement were feeble fences against 	1
and intrusted with the management of the public re- 	1
and in valour ; and a single battle must, in all probabi- 	1
and invited it to action, no man's ambition was more 	1
and in which every thing which could feed a vital flame 	1
and irresolution were his predominant failings ; the one 	1
and irritated the whole nation, by demanding that the 	1
and is in the press : but I recommended to her your History of 	1
and is still, considered the best introduction to the 	1
and it appears from several passages in his history, that 	1
and it could hardly be expected that any thing but 	1
and it is evident from this review of his administration, 	1
and it is not easy to account for her long silence with 	1
and it now appeared from the queen's conduct, that nobles - 	1
and its declension in the neighbouring kingdoms, occa- 	1
and its revenues were both exorbitant and ill-applied. 	1
and its situation in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, 	1
and it was the occasion of leading the queen of Scots 	1
and jealousies had arisen between her and Elizabeth, 	1
and jealousies of the nation by desisting from fortifying 	1
and jealousies, there prevailed in the nation such a ge- ~~ 	1
and justice, had spread among all ranks of men. The 	1
and kingdom against the imminent calamities, that, in 	1
and Knox ; but there are several collections of papers by An- 	1
and laudable jealousy, which would otherwise have 	1
and laws of her country, a stranger to her subjects, 	1
and legal security to the protestants, as was deemed, in that age, an ac- 	1
and liberal bookseller has invited me to celebrate the double 	1
and love of his country, merited equally the esteem of 	1
and made his peace with the regent on very easy terms ; 	1
and magnificence, and fond of them, as was natural at 	1
and manner of his own trial ; and he still enjoyed not 	1
and martial people. During any war on the continent, 	1
and Mary, cern the fallacy and deceit of all Elizabeth's proceed- 	1
and measures were taken by him for preventing any 	1
and Melvil, in order to save his life, was obliged to~~ 	1
and memory of all offences, committed since the sixth 	1
and men of that age, and fills us with horrour at both, palace. 	1
and military, assumed every ensign of royalty but the 	1
and moderation, and engage the English to look to- 	1
and more extensive views. The removing of the French 	1
and more successful than ever; and their doctrines 	1
and more tragical nature. 1567 	1
and mortal enemies. Huntly was linked in the closest 	1
and most commonly of eight temporal and eight spiritual 	1
and most defenceless. 	1
and most humble servant. 	1
and most sacred union, have been accustomed, in every 	1
and M. Suard is repeatedly pressed, in my hearing, to 	1
and Murray ceeding without delay to crown the young prince. The 	1
and Murray returned in triumph to Aberdeen with his 	1
and no farther use shall be made of them than you permit. 	1
and no prince ever ventured to transgress the bound- 	1
and no prince was allowed to retain any superiority, 	1
and, not knowing what course the queen had taken, it 	1
and numbers, and fancied that, as soon as the bill 	1
and obliged the author to devote much of his time to 	1
and oblige the possessors to refund whatever they had 	1
and occa- port. The people, inflamed by such vehement de- 	1
and of all these enormities they required such speedy 	1
and of a mean understanding. As he did not leave any 	1
and of deep sympathy with her sufferings. 	1
and of exercising that worship, which so great a part of 	1
and of lenity c . A few days before her death, she de- 	1
and often granted, voluntarily, such supplies to their 	1
and of the glory of the nation. Such an army, how- 	1
and of want. His indigence forced him upon a course 	1
and one lay-elder. The whole number is three hun- 	1
and one of her maids, locked them behind her, and 	1
and, on reaching the shore, was received with the ut- 	1
and open countries are formed for servitude. The au- 	1
and oppressive acts, before they take arms against their 	1
and oppressive jurisdiction of the ecclesiastical courts, 1558. 	1
and other gentlemen, dwelling within the said counties, that they, and every 	1
and other heads of religious houses, had, either from a 	1
and other leaders of that party. The presence of the 	1
and other payments in kind, at an undervalue ; and by 	1
and others coveted the wealth, of the dignified clergy ; 	1
and others zealous advocates for the protestant faith 8 . 	1
and out of complaisance to him, her subjects, her no- 	1
and overawed the ambition of the Scottish queen. But 	1
and Panter, bishop of Ross, whom the queen had gained 	1
and papers as you think to be necessary for my purpose. I 	1
and patient inquirer as your lordship. I hope that what I 	1
and periods. History, from its comparative youth, is 	1
and placed him on the throne. His gratitude and ge- 	1
and place. Mr. Stewart I had not even the pleasure of 	1
and pleasure : for he is one of the best pens in Paris. 	1
and popularity, than the nobles, of whom it was com- 	1
and posted his troops in a small village, and among 	1
and powerful nobility. Scotland, a kingdom neither 	1
and powerful protector, and have derived the same as- 	1
and prayed me to keep myself and my folks within, for it is scant in his 	1
and precarious subsistence : a retreat, therefore, was 	1
and precariqus, as naturally incited a feudal monarch to 	1
and pre- remarkable ; but if we reflect upon the circumstances 	1
and prevailed on them to favour it, by the promise of 	1
and probably never will. If I understand your hint, I should 	1
and public archives, as well as the repositories of pri- 	1
and queen 1 . 	1
and ready, on all occasions, to sacrifice her own opi- 	1
and recommending his passion", could hardly fail of 	1
and refinement ; and insolence grew upon him from con- 	1
and refinements more natural to her sex. By a dex- 	1
and rendered formidable by regular discipline, had 	1
and rendered her possession of it precarious and in- 	1
and required that she should either be restored to her 	1
and requiring their direction with regard to the obe- 	1
and resentment against England, had prepared a great 	1
and resentment of the other nobles, or to enrich with 	1
and resolved to frighten the Scots into a treaty, which 	1
and, resting upon their conformity to evidence already 	1
and retired to Dunbar. The scheme of their flight had 	1
and retirement, were things unknown and unpopular. 	1
and revenge. She had the address, at the same time, 	1
Andrew's, and prior of Whithorn, for celebrating mass 	1
Andrew's, one the most powerful, and the other the 	1
Andrew's p ; with this inconsiderable force they ad- 	1
Andrew's, the most remarkable person in the party for 	1
Andrew's. They had advanced but a few miles, when, Jan. 23. 	1
Andrew's to ^ e king, his master, for the security of their lives; and, 	1
and saluted her galleys, and staying her ships examined them of pirates, 	1
and savage manners of puritanism, with which her 	1
and Scotland, and the long intercourse of good offices 	1
and Scots, between whom there was a close intercourse 	1
and securing its liberties, required the immediate ex- 	1
and sedentary habits; his disorder was the jaundice, 	1
and seeming pleasure ; and discovered all the symp- 	1
and seldom ventured to preach, but in private houses, 	1
and sensibly felt this disaster; and if a prince of full 	1
and served her, on that occasion, with so much fidelity 	1
and several of the nobility, declared that she was now 	1
and shock which this sudden explosion occasioned, 	1
and simple worship of the primitive christians, there 	1
and sincerity. I am no stranger to your book, though your 	1
and singular fabric erected by them, the first object 	1
and sir Alexander Livingston. Jealousy and discord 	1
and sixty-two m , both the earl and the lady Margaret 	1
and so formidable was this combination to the king, 	1
and some openly revolted to her side. In so difficult a 	1
and Spain and Germany first appeared to make a trial 	1
and submitted by the queen to the consideration of her 	1
and success, as made the deepest impression on her 	1
and surmises, enough to justify the imprisoning and 	1
and sword. But Elizabeth, whose interest it was to 	1
and that he would concur with the utmost ardour in 	1
and that he would take no steps in the affair but at my desire 	1
and that* it was the prerogative of the king alone to 	1
and that many thought them preferable even to her 	1
and that of Dr. Adam Smith ; (whose health and welfare will 	1
and that of his friends, towards the execution of this 	1
and that of my family, to live and to compose; as a 	1
and that seems to be implied in their demand of the 	1
and that the student who, by years of recluse applica- 	1
and the bravery of the people, made the conquest of 	1
and the cardinal amused him so artfully, and spun out 	1
and the cardinal of Lorrain, though subtle and in- 	1
and the consequence was, that his conversation was 	1
and the considerations which he mentions had, during 	1
and the country between the two walls was alternately 	1
and the dangerous encroachments of the queen upon 	1
and the dryness of my undertaking will be relieved by mix- 	1
and the duty of preaching being left wholly to monks 	1
and the earl, despised or forsaken by all, was soon 	1
and the Every ones imagination was at work to guess who 	1
and the extent of their jurisdiction, were the two chief ^rds this 	1
and the fierce manners of the people, rendered the 	1
and the guardians and defenders of the constitution, 	1
and the innocency of Mary with regard to Babington's con- 	1
and the intrigues of the queen dowager, sister of Henry 	1
and their endeavours to gain the queen, they reckoned 	1
and their extreme poverty, had, for seven years, per- 	1
and their influence, seconded by the charms of the young 	1
and their partizans, he endured all the scorn and insult, 	1
and the king perhaps believed, that a familiarity of a 	1
and the love of liberty ; and ten thousand men fled be- 	1
and the nation, by its eagerness to guard against a civil 	1
and the nation." Essays on Brit. Antiq. 55. It is probable, however, 	1
and the nobles, to put an end to the quarrel without 	1
and then to subject the kingdom. The authority of an 	1
and the other deeds which she had signed during her 	1
and the other surviving conspirators against cardinal 	1
and the power of its leaders great, soon lost reputation 	1
and the prejudices Scotsmen themselves have imbibed, 	1
and the prince's treasury received little supply from a 	1
and the regent could not, with safety, leave behind 	1
and the ruin and dispersion of the party must have in- 	1
and the safety of her son 1 : the former was Maitland's 	1
and the Scots were, at once, exposed to a flight of ar- 	1
and the seasonable interposition of England in behalf 	1
and these of no considerable rank, suffered for this 	1
and the situation of Europe rendered it so necessary, 	1
and the state of the nation, necessarily occasioned great 	1
and the turbulence of her subjects, which presented 	1
and the use which we shall hereafter find him making 	1
and the utmost rage at disappointment. On the other, 	1
and the wishes of her friends . With this view, the 	1
and they did not despair of obtaining the restoration of 	1
and the young prince kneeling before it, and uttering 	1
and the zeal of a proselyte, he had uttered sentiments, 	1
and this morning have run them over with great avidity. 	1
and those polished manners, which alone can render 	1
and, though neither the same pretence of policy, nor 	1
and, though solicited by her subjects, and courted by 	1
and though the earl of Arran openly aspired to marry 	1
and through roads almost impassable, arrived at Leith, 	1
and thrown herself into the arms of her nearest neigh- 	1
and titles of dignity, flow from him, as the only fountain 	1
and to advise and assist him in the administration of 	1
and to afford them an opportunity of revenging their 	1
and to constitute him king of that part of Scotland 	1
and to create the prince perpetual difficulties, by fo- 	1
and to declare war against England. But James, who 	1
and to defend themselves to the uttermost against all 	1
and to detect their misrepresentations. 	1
and to Eli- Though the earls of Morton, Glencairn, and Mait- 	1
and to enter into a new war with that kingdom. Henry 	1
and to examine whether the foundation on which his 	1
and to explain their real causes and effects, is his pecu- 	1
and to gain time. The regent had applied to France 	1
and, together with a few favourites, was the companion 	1
and to govern it. He abandoned, therefore, the former 	1
and to have no recourse to arms without the most ur- 	1
and to increase their suspicions k . 	1
and to lay in a stock of future merit. The amusements 1561. 	1
and told her that she should not see his face again for 	1
and to make one bold stand, before they were stripped 	1
and to offer his advice with respect to the most effec- 	1
and to offer reject the proposals of Henry the eighth; and, by offer- 	1
and to permit the free and public profession of the 	1
and to reform the manners of mankind, had hitherto 	1
and to restore the popish ecclesiastics to the possession 	1
and to second his negotiations with a numerous army, 	1
and to spend its rage. Intrigue and policy supplied the 	1
and to suffer every thing for a good cause, could have 	1
and to support, to the utmost of his power, the religion 	1
and to their sovereign, the French allowed them no 	1
and to the kings of France and Spain, with many pro- 1566 - 	1
and to vindicate themselves from those crimes with 	1
and tranquillity was not natural to the feudal aristo- 	1
and two thousand horse, under the command of lord s 	1
and unavoidable, who were quick in discerning an in- 	1
and uncourtly in his manner 5 , expostulated so warmly 	1
and, under the name of ' deadly feuds,' subsisted for 	1
and undistracted by those cares, and unincumbered with 	1
and ungenerous actions. The peculiarity of her situ- 	1
and ungovernable province k . But, at this time, the 	1
and ungovernable spirit of the borderers. In all our 	1
and, unless in his own presence, none but his confi- 	1
and unrelenting tyrant seems to be unjustly affixed to 	1
and unsuccessful. As many doctrines of their church 	1
and unwilling perhaps to rebel ; he hesitated for some 	1
and, upon the approach of some troops gathered to- 	1
and various opinions arose with regard to each of these. 	1
and various strictures have been made by persons, who 	1
and very inconsiderable. The vassals of every baron 	1
and vigour, and was served by her subjects with fidelity 	1
and vigour sufficient to overturn a system founded on 	1
and violated and despised as often, is a standing proof 	1
and voices were heard in the middle of the night, 	1
and voluntary excursions of barons, who served at their 	1
and war, both in its commencement and its operations, 	1
and warmly adopted by many laics; but the nobles 	1
and was got far beyond their reach. The regent died 	1
and was prevailed on to aspire to that station, to which 	1
and wealth by serving the crown, they, in their turn, 	1
and were disposed to believe every thing. The most 	1
and when he, overawed by the confederates, was ob- 	1
and when the arms or policy of princes had, everywhere, 	1
and, wherever they came, endangered or overturned the 	1
and whether Elizabeth, if she approved of the pro- 	1
and which had been perverted to a purpose so con- 	1
and which I shall transcribe to you. It is a relation of what 	1
and which must at once have annihilated the preroga- 	1
and while every person concerned, even Mary and 	1
And while he amused the queen for some days, by pre- 	1
and who, by his superior abilities, had acquired an in- 	1
and who, together with the castle, had fallen into the 	1
and Willox appeared for the whole order, and pro- 	1
and, with his land forces, retired safely to the English 	1
and with many appearances of despotic power, a feudal 	1
and with my approbation. When the matter was proposed 	1
and, without any other right, arrogated to them- 	1
and without consulting the rest of the nobles, carried 	1
and without long tarrying to beat down or overthrow the castle ; sack . . . 	1
and without opposition, to marry a queen, the wife of 	1
and, without the smallest right to any share in the ad- 	1
and, with skilful management, might have produced 	1
and with their inferiors, the Scottish nobles strengthen- ^Uom 	1
and would have produced evidence in support of his 	1
and would willingly have extricated himself out of it, 	1
and writings of the foreign reformers became generally 	1
an ear ? Do you not know, that this (n) is added be- 	1
An elegant French translation of the work was, soon 	1
an enemy who had already surrounded the hill on 	1
an enterprise, in which they had so fatally experienced 	1
AN ESSAY 	1
an event of itself abundantly mortifying to that haughty 	1
anew, and with greater warmth ; but the queen, taking 	1
a new association, by which they bound themselves, on 	1
a new light on the present state of the Spanish pro- 	1
a new passion in her heart. 	1
A new re- Though the number of protestant preachers was now 	1
an example of rebellion to my own subjects, by coun- 	1
an extraordinary case, Elizabeth was willing to have granted 	1
angry hedgehog, as any encounter the front of their pikes." Other curious 	1
Angus out of the kingdom ; and, sensible that a person 	1
an house unfortified, and of easy access, the queen 	1
an hundred and fifty years of peace between the two 	1
an idea so natural and so popular, that it has been es- 	1
an illustrious example of fortunate ambition. From the 	1
an impartial distribution of this fund, to promote true 	1
an inconsiderable number ; and, as if peace had been 	1
an indifferent spectator of their transactions. 	1
an infant of a year old ; and though the office of regent 	1
an inquiry of such public importance had been hitherto 	1
an insolence usual to the fortunate, looked down upon 	1
an instrument for destroying those whom the Almighty 	1
an interest on subjects that had so often been treated, 	1
An inter- In the beginning of summer, Mary, who was desirous 	1
An interview between Charles the ninth, and his 	1
an interview. This, however, was far from being the 	1
annexed to the crown; and out of that, the queen un- 	1
annulling, and' abrogating of all laws, acts, and constitutions, canone, ci- 	1
a noble use of the advantages you have had. You 	1
an opportunity of perusing the History of America, 	1
Another circumstance contributed somewhat to ac- 	1
Another convention of estates was held in May. The 	1
another kind contributed to widen the breach, and fe- 	1
Another law prohibited the wardenship of the marches 	1
another, prompted many different princes to solicit an 	1
answer. 	1
answers convinced the ambassador that his mediation 	1
answer such an accusation ; and as she foresaw that the 	1
antagonist who was thus supported. Though Lennox's 	1
antiquary. Sir Robert Cotton, whose library is now 	1
antiquated prejudices ; but in one thousand five hundred 	1
ants, in a corner of her kingdom. Not thinking herself 	1
An unexpected accident, however, put into the hands 	1
an unprecedented stretch of power, had conferred on 	1
anxiety which attend those who are not previously ap- 	1
any answer to the regent's demands, she resolved to 	1
any business introduced into parliament, but what had 	1
any censure, with which Darnly might endeavour to 	1
any concession in favour of the protestant religion, on 	1
any danger from that quarter, had early endeavoured 	1
any degree of attention, has appeared since these col- 	1
any further correspondence with the former, though he appears, in many 	1
any general plan of policy. But, though some of their 	1
any longer to serve an ambitious ally, at the price of 	1
any measures for their defence, and impossible to act 	1
any measure she had yet taken, of her inexorable re- 	1
any of his adversaries. Kirkaldy of Grange, Murray 	1
any of his predecessors in Scotland, possessed a natural 	1
any of their subjects of the offices, benefices, or estates, 	1
any of them to be above his merit. As his own emi- 	1
any of the Scottish nobles who professed the protestant 	1
any ornament that might add to the attraction of the 	1
any other additions and alterations, to Mr. Davidson, who has 	1
any other that has yet seen the light. It contains so ample a 	1
any previous resolution formed by Mary's ministers to ruin Huntly and his 	1
any progress in the execution of it, further than form- 	1
any recent transactions? I must therefore have abandoned 	1
any scheme of accommodation. As the queen wasstrances. 	1
any suspicion of their proceedings, from some con- 	1
any thing against Huntly by violence : her train was not more numerous 	1
any thing like the present resistance to the whole 	1
a pardon. Hamilton of Bothwelhaugh was one of 	1
A parlia- 	1
A parlia- The eyes of every man in that kingdom were turned 	1
A parlia- The parliament met this year, for the first time since 	1
A parlia- Two days after the trial, a parliament was held, at 	1
a particular year, in which I have been very little in town. 	1
a part, is not less requisite towards understanding the 	1
A peace Meanwhile, hostilities were continued by both na- 	1
a people bred to arms, and as prompt as the Scots to 	1
a peremptory manner, and with such severe denuncia- 	1
a person died ' intestate,' the disposal of his effects was 	1
a person of eminent authority with the party, to pro- 	1
apology for Dr. Robertson's performance of this part 	1
apostacy. It had already taken so deep root in the 	1
a powerful enemy, formed a plot to assassinate him, 	1
apparent 5 . Attempts were made towards a reconcile- 	1
appealed to his justice, against the false accusations of 	1
appealed to manuscript, it would be necessary for me to ap- 	1
appeal or complaint under the review of a higher juris- 	1
appearance of probability to the imputation with which 	1
appearances with France, her subsidies were bestowed 	1
appearance, was not pronounced against him x . 	1
appear before them in his name, and to produce what 	1
appeared in the name of the king and queen, and no 	1
appeared required talents of different kinds : military 	1
appeared the more ungenerous, and criminal: and in 	1
appeared to assert his own rights, and to vindicate the 	1
appeared to be no less intricate, than it was important. 	1
appeared to have been consumed. I am sure I read 	1
appears altogether mysterious, inconsistent, and inex- 	1
appears from the letters of her own ambassadors. Keith, 280. 288. 	1
appears, on a nearer view, to possess almost none of m ited the 	1
appears, that the lords of articles were chosen in the manner, afterwards 	1
appears, that the regents, Murray and Lennox, had desired 	1
appear, they were not destitute of solemnity. As the 	1
appear to be forced into exile by her neglect and ill 	1
appear to be so reasonable and well-digested, as might 	1
appear with a very suspicious air, and will be consi- 	1
appeased her resentment, but determined her to raise 	1
appellation of ' Dr. Robertson's administration.' To 	1
applauded their choice b . 	1
applause of many among her subjects, his natural 	1
applause, that before the end of the month his book- 	1
application; hence, I believe, it is, that in those com- 	1
applications of the malecontents, and gave them private 	1
applied to him. His recommendations were observed 	1
appllations of the 'king's court 8 ,' and of the 'king's 	1
apply that revenue towards maintaining a body of re- 	1
appointed at Stirling. He hurried instantly to Perth, 	1
appointed by an act of parliament, 1633. Keith, p. 487. Spotswood 	1
appointed for committing the intended violence. But, 	1
appointed love, they produced those symptoms of de- 	1
appointment, anger, and resentment, upon a sanguine 	1
appointment as principal of the university, till his re- 	1
appoint proper persons to examine her title to the suc- 	1
apprehend all those which they say be the principal impugnators of amity 	1
apprehension of danger, it was natural for a woman to 	1
apprehensions of her subjects by such a gracious law s . 	1
Apprehensive of being cut off from their companions 	1
approached, Mary and her ministers were employed in Mary's de- 	1
approach, who had lodged during the night in a part 	1
approbation 1 . A treaty concerning which they con- 	1
approve, but surely can never admire. It has no har- 	1
approve of their scheme. They slackened the reins of 	1
approve then" conduct, or confirm it by their royal 	1
a preferable title. Personal injuries soon increased the 	1
a present of twenty thousand crowns . It is not the 	1
a pretender to astrology and magic, he was revered 	1
April 14, The marriage, however, was celebrated with great 	1
April 14. th opening of which the queen distinguished Bothwell, 	1
April 15. At first the French endeavoured to keep possession 	1
April 19. sent to an entertainment. Having filled the house with 	1
April 24. would have added lustre to it. Suffer me either to 	1
April 6. A few days after they arrived in Scotland, the Eng- 	1
April, one thousand five hundred and fifty-four, that theregency ' 	1
a prince did not render them less vigilant, or less eager 	1
a prince with revenues much more considerable than 	1
a prisoner for many years. This action, though de- 	1
a prisoner in England, and involved in continual war se&lt; 	1
a prisoner ; she recalled the earl of Sutherland, who, 	1
a proclamation in place of an act of parliament, might 	1
A proof of the fierce resentment of the Scots is contained in the note on 	1
a proper person, skilled in the principles of geography, to em- 	1
A proposal in order to consider them. Elizabeth's letter contained 	1
a public approbation of his conduct. For, whatever 	1
a queen of Scotland 5 ." 	1
a queen, such behaviour was intolerable. The lower 	1
a queen, who was lineal heir to an ancient race of mo- 	1
a rational lover of fame may be satisfied if he deserves and 	1
archbishop of St. Andrew's, opposed it with so much 	1
archbishop of St. Andrew's to his ancient jurisdiction, 	1
archbishop's nativity, from which he pretends both to have predicted his 	1
archduke 	1
ardent zeal for religion, which the danger to which it 	1
ardour of some. By open reproach and accusation she 	1
ardour, will not, perhaps, be deemed an unnecessary 	1
are almost sufficient to satisfy the utmost avidity of an 	1
are bestowed only on the lowest and most infamous 	1
are deeply rooted in the human heart. The same hatred 	1
are inflamed with the passions, which civil war inspires, 	1
are innumerable, and his power small ; his jurisdiction within his own de- 	1
a remarkable fact, which shows the unsettled state of 	1
are natural to a form of government nearly aristocratical. 	1
are not more consistent. Melvil alleges, that the design of the conspirators 	1
are not to advance. It is, at that period, the most interesting 	1
are perpetual ; their jurisdictions within their own territories separate and 	1
are requisite towards discovering them. The abuses 	1
are separated by an imaginary line. The slender re- 	1
are situated towards the different extremities of Europe. 	1
are still extant. The fabulous tales of the early British 	1
are subject, and from which persons who have moved 	1
are thrown into violent and unnatural convulsions. But, 	1
a retreat in the harbours of that kingdom, Mary sent 	1
A REVIEW OF THE SCOTTISH HISTORY 	1
argument. 	1
argument obtained by her commissioners during the 	1
arguments to this purpose, Castelnau mentioned Mary's 	1
arguments were urged of no inconsiderable weight. 	1
Argyll and Huntly refused to be included in this 	1
Argyll, Huntly, Bothwell, and other powerful barons, He excites 	1
Argyll were exasperated against Huntly and Bothwell, 	1
arid Torsifan a fencing-master. So despicable a retinue 	1
aries which the law had prescribed to prerogative, with- 	1
a right to the earldom of Mar, Stewart resigned it in 	1
a right to the undisturbed possession of their ancient 	1
a riotous manner, interrupted the service, and filled 	1
arising from a consciousness that his abilities were not 	1
arising from the increase of the French troops, the 	1
a rising ground, above Musselburgh, not far from the 	1
aristocracy from ruin. 	1
aristocracy, his reign was distinguished by an event 	1
aristocracy, which stood not in need of any accession of 	1
armed and provided,] and with twenty days' victuals, to meet and to pass 	1
armed followers, a scuffle ensued, in which lord Ogilvie 	1
armed men p , he opened to the company his intention 	1
armed the ecclesiastics against them. They longed to 	1
armies has, on every occasion, been insupportable to 	1
armour, and their manner as well of going to offend, as of standing to de- 	1
armour, and with that ghastly and horrid look which 	1
armour, was intrusted with the executive part; and 	1
arms, according to custom z . Bothwell was at that time 	1
arms against her. Upon her agreeing to the mar- 	1
arms, committing her to prison, compelling her to re- 	1
arms of the congregation having obliged him to retire 	1
arms, serted a court, where faith and honour seemed to them 	1
arms with him ; other vassals were proud to imitate 	1
arms with more inflamed resentment, and with bolder 	1
army ; and might easily have crushed them, before they 	1
army, and the expenses of a siege, soon exhausted this 	1
army consisted almost entirely of infantry, whose chief 	1
army had not brought him a short relief. 	1
army into Scotland; in conclusion, the Scots made 	1
army, led by chieftains who were almost independent. 	1
army, the leaders of which received her with much 	1
army, they marched with great rapidity to Edinburgh, 	1
Arran's friendship. He withdrew, for that reason, from 	1
Arran was the person destined to be the unhappy vic- 	1
Arran, who, though a subject, was nearly allied to the 	1
arrears of her dowry were instantly paid ; more punc- 	1
arrival of an ambassador from France seems to have 	1
arrival of the English ambassador. In the first trans- 	1
arrived in Scotland about two months after. Keith, 269. The queen im- 	1
artful delay, they both studied an extreme politeness 	1
artfully amused them with the prospect of an immediate 	1
artfully induced the French ambassadors, not only to 	1
artful policy, the progress of the reformation might 	1
artful princess dressed out the French demands in a 	1
article in the treaty was punctually executed ; the lat- 	1
articles could not find leisure to consider the great multitude of affairs laid 	1
articles for their mutual security agreed upon. The 	1
articles. Keith's Hist, of Scotland, p. 331. The other account is lord 	1
articles of marriage, a laudable concern for the dignity 	1
artifice and force, which he well knew how to employ 	1
artillery, or magazines, requisite for that purpose ; and 	1
art of these new assailants, they, after a short resistance, 	1
art of writing, and the use of numbers, without which 	1
arts and sciences, which were then deemed necessary 	1
arts of insinuation and address, took the young prince 	1
arts of policy, which were necessary for maintaining that 	1
arts which the queen had employed. 	1
art to disengage him from his new associates. His 	1
art to regain his confidence, and then proposed to re- to"^ 1116 	1
ary ' to that with which he had treated her during her illness 	1
as acts of their royal favour and indulgence. And, lest 	1
a Sadler's Lett. 161. Haynes, State Papers, 486. 	1
as a man of consequence. The whole train of suitors 	1
as an bus- of any share in that crime ; and their decision had been 	1
as any of their neighbours. Relying upon uncertain * e " :ote&gt; 	1
as a representative in the general assembly, where his 	1
as a rival in power. 	1
as a rival, who had supplanted him in the queen's fa- 	1
As, before the union of the two crowns, no subject 	1
as bigots bound to keep no faith with heretics. Men too 	1
As both these, especially the former, were reckoned in- 	1
ascendant over her councils, Bothwell, if we may believe 	1
ascendant over her husband; and, as she transferred 	1
ascendant over mankind. 	1
ascendant over them, which a feudal chief usually pos- 	1
as close as possible, she showed a disposition to relax 	1
as consanguinity was, in those ages, a powerful bond 	1
a Scotchman to place the least confidence in the pro- 	1
A Scottish parliament suitable to the aristocratical 	1
A Scottish parliament, then, consisted anciently of 	1
ascribes to love, are sometimes' really produced by that 	1
ascribe to business, to study, to pleasure, to constitutional in- 	1
As Darnly was so nearly related to the queen, the 	1
as dexterous in the conduct of sieges, as the Scots were 	1
A second skirmish, which happened a few days after, 	1
a secure retreat to the discontented and seditious. 	1
a sensible manner ; and the advantage and superiority 	1
a sentiment, which, however apt those of royal condi- 	1
a separate and almost independent society. Instead of 	1
as equally sacred. 	1
As far back as our records enable us to trace the con- 	1
as gallant an army as ever any of his ancestors had 	1
as had contributed most zealously towards his eleva- 	1
as have merited the greatest renown, discovered an ad- 	1
as have never been published; I should not wish to 	1
As he left the apartment, he turned towards the queen, 	1
as Henry the eighth an act of parliament had autho- 	1
as Henry was preparing to renew his proposals con- 	1
As her aversion for her husband, and the suspicious 	1
As her palace was defended only by a slender guard, it 	1
As her unhappy breach with her husband had long 	1
a short time before the meeting of the assembly. The 	1
as I can recollect, ever appeared in any former collec- 	1
aside, the distinguishing manners of their own nation, 	1
aside the pacific habits of his profession, and quitted 	1
as if they had been the original authors n . 	1
As I know how thoroughly your lordship is acquainted 	1
as incapable of governing, the crown was placed on his 	1
as in every age impose on the credulity of the factious. 	1
a single victory might give them the superiority, which 	1
as in other instances, towards a more regular and per- 	1
as I told you. I can only express my wishes that you may 	1
As it was no longer possible to mistake the queen's 	1
a slight diversion in Britain was sufficient to divide the 	1
a slight insurrection headed by the duke of Albany's 	1
as marking the anxiety of a lover, but little suited the 	1
As Mary loved splendour and magnificence, she re- 	1
as men void of courage, or of humanity, as equally 	1
As most of the bishops and several of the other dig- 	1
as much importance as any which could fall under the 	1
as much inferior to Mary in beauty and gracefulness of 	1
As neither the French nor Piedmontese ambassadors December, 	1
asperated by so many indignities, the Scots were never 	1
a spirit, that burst out, at last, with irresistible violence. 	1
a spiritual man.' This claim was sustained ; and his name is not inserted in 	1
assassinate himself; and their success was equal to the 	1
assassination is a virtue more meritorious in a knight 	1
assembled his followers ; and marching out of Edin- 	1
assembled in the camp before Haddingtoun. The in- 1548 ' 	1
assembled, without courage or experience in war. The 	1
assemble together, order must be established, and a 	1
assemblies, was very different from that to which they 	1
assembling mankind, was neglected ; the nobles, in or- 	1
assembly addressed the queen, can be imputed only to 	1
assembly claimed, and actually possessed a power of 	1
assembly has been unable to overtake. 	1
assembly, whose acts were likely to prove decisive with 	1
assent. The reception of their ambassador was no 	1
asserted their own privileges, and contended for the 	1
as shall be given by him to them in our sovereign lady's name, for quietness 	1
as she apprehended, lay in wait in order to intercept 	1
As she could not, with all her address, make the least 	1
as she still needed them for a counterpoize to the arch- 	1
assiduous care. She seldom was absent from him dcred there ' 	1
assist them in promoting the common cause. While their 	1
associates in the murder of the king, and that they now wanted to ruin him. 	1
associates were not at first incited by Henry to murder 	1
associate. Their own private revenge upon Rizio would 	1
association in defence of the king's government; but 	1
association, the object whereof was the personal security of those who joined 	1
as some maintain through choice, but more probably 	1
as some writers, during the noontide of Buonaparte's 	1
As soon as Mary arrived in England, she wrote a Elizabeth 	1
as soon as she recovered liberty. Throkmorton, by a 	1
assume the authority which belonged to her, without 	1
assume the master; his new vassals, fierce and inde- 	1
assuming ally. Under the feudal governments, it was 	1
assurances of friendship and protection. These cir- 	1
assurances of powerful support to their cause. Ran- 	1
assure you these were not a little sanguine. If upon a more 	1
assuring your highness that, unless the ships be delivered, there will be 	1
a statute exempting them from personal attendance, and 	1
as the allotment for their subsistence was, they had not 	1
A.S the day appointed for the meeting of parliament 1566. 	1
As the French had reason to expect difficulties in car- 	1
as their personal safety, depending entirely on the una- 1559. 	1
As the minority of James the fifth was longer, it was James 	1
As the number of the protestant clergy daily increased, 	1
As the popish ecclesiastics became more and more 	1
As the queen was kept in a sort of captivity by Both- 	1
as the subject of this preliminary book required, it may be agreeable, per- 	1
as the worst of all evils. While the remembrance of 	1
as they easily foresaw, that she would not remain long 	1
as they passed the river, were considerably exposed to 	1
as they were active in the field. An hundred and fifty 	1
As this is the second instance of deliberate assassi- An account 	1
astical court. Home himself resigned his living, and 	1
astics to open schools, and take upon them the public 	1
astonished at this proceeding of a prince, whose interest 	1
astonished at this unexpected revolution, resolved, at 	1
a stop to it in Scotland. 	1
A stranger to the manners, the laws, and the language 	1
a stronger proof how violently he suspected the one 	1
a style which by no means disgraces the original. 	1
a subject much more considerable than him. He saw 	1
a subject to her bed. Darnly was in no situation to 	1
a sudden, she marched directly to Perth, in hopes of 	1
a superstitious spirit seized christians, they were obliged 	1
as well as concern for her own safety, obliged her to 	1
as well as her own impatience under her present situa- 	1
as well as his own, with respect to your History of Scot- 	1
as well as on other accounts, a council of the nobles 	1
as well as the extent of her power. The season of the 	1
as well as the violence of their prejudices, rendered 	1
A system of conduct, pursued with so much success 	1
as zeal of their friends, to improve such a favourable 	1
at a distance from her, and in that part of the king- 	1
at a juncture so critical, can scarce be imputed to 	1
at any future time have occasion for it. 	1
at any period more attached to France, or more alienated 	1
at any subsequent period, it is certain that, at this junc- 	1
At a time when pomp and splendour were little known, Their reve- 	1
at a trial, the manner and circumstances of which were 	1
at a very early hour, and to read and write much be- 	1
at court ; and retiring to the north, where his estate 	1
ated in a state of irresolution, and did not act heartily 	1
at first, but gradually increasing ; and the events which 	1
at first with extreme frugality. The subsistence of an 	1
at full liberty ; and though Bothwell's violence in seiz- 	1
at full liberty to act upon the continent with his whole 	1
a Theory of Moral Sentiments. b Essay on Taste. 	1
a The situation of the world at the time of Christ's appearance, and its 	1
A third Their dangerous situation easily induced the leaders 	1
Athol, and Cassils, openly attended mass ; she herself 	1
Athol, Huntly, Bothwell, and other confidents of the 	1
Athol, was remarkable for an uniform and bigoted at- 	1
at Inverness, the commanding officer in the castle, by 	1
ation heightened, no doubt, and increased, but did not 	1
ation in the order of succession to the crown. 	1
ation of taking immediate possession of her new dignity. 	1
at Jedhurgh. She no longer felt that warmth of con- 	1
at last on the coast opposite to that island, and fixed 	1
At last, preliminaries were settled on both sides, and 	1
at last the lord of the forest. 	1
At last the prior, with his feeble party, was con- 1560. 	1
at length, obliged to fly into England for refuge. 	1
at no pains to gain its friendship ; but, on the contrary, 	1
at Perth, in order to deliberate more fully concerning 	1
at Perth, into France, together with the other persons taken in 	1
at present animated against the queen, and deprive 	1
A translation of it was previously advertised here. 	1
A treaty 	1
A treaty of marriage, proposed by one queen, who 	1
attachment. I consider myself as writing to both, and will 	1
attachment to Darnly, which he represented to be so 	1
attachment to the catholic faith P. But though the 	1
attacked by new invaders, rendering it necessary to be 	1
attacking every vessel which fell in his way, endea- 	1
attack with more impetuosity than good conduct. A 	1
attained by attending to the state of Germany, and to the history of France. 	1
attained it, would envy others the acquisition of such 	1
attained. There is no power in the understanding, and 	1
attain the high objects at which they aimed, ventured 	1
attainting several of the queen's adherents ; to restore 	1
attempted to stab him d . It required all Mary's atten- 	1
attempt either to apprehend or slay the cardinal, at some time when he shall 	1
attempts of conquest. Elizabeth, on her part, promised 	1
attempts to extend the royal authority ; though he put 	1
attempt to account for the eagerness and zeal, with 	1
attempt towards action must have been fatal to the 	1
attendants, and subjected to the insults of a haughty 	1
attendants, landed at Wirkington in Cumberland, and 	1
attended all their measures, there could be little doubt 	1
attended by the earls of Mar and Morton, Maitland, 	1
attended the court ; complaints and threatenings soon 	1
attended with little authority, and which inspired no 	1
attended with success, we must not, for that reason 	1
attend his courts, and to assist both in passing and exe- 	1
attends such an extraordinary and rapid change of 	1
attend the convention agreed upon ; and, regardless 	1
attention and strength of the English, whose domestic 	1
attention of all Europe. You are very much in the right of 	1
attention of the lords of articles. No provision is made in the act for the 	1
attention. She herself seems early to have formed a 	1
attention which prudence prescribes, but with that aver- 	1
attention with which she observed his conduct, became 	1
attested annals reach, is obscure ; an immense space is 	1
at that time, all their representations of grievances car- 	1
at that time, and a surprising resemblance in their na- 	1
at that time, and seemed altogether inconsistent with 	1
at that time, of little consequence. 	1
at that time one of her attendants ; and the officer by 	1
at the appearance of his other histories, the author re- 	1
at the bap- chose to reside at Stirling, but confined himself to his 	1
At the completion of his academical studies, in 1741, 	1
at the expense of mankind. I had rather by far that 	1
at the head of the partisans of France and the defenders 	1
at their first meeting, to examine the points in differ- 	1
At the next meeting of the commissioners, the earl 	1
at the parochial school of his native place ; when he 	1
at the representation of such a tragedy, from which I 	1
At the same time, by the discovery of the new world, 	1
at the same time her disapprobation of the match, in * 	1
At the same time he renewed his former confederacy 	1
At the same time, no matrimonial or testamentary 	1
at the same time proclamations, conferring the title of 	1
At the same time she seems to have been sensible 	1
at the same time, she warmly interceded in behalf of 	1
at the same time talks of all his attempts with the 	1
At the same time, the queen's generals had com- May 13. 	1
at the same time, the question with regard to the 	1
At the same time we discover, by the facility with 	1
at the time of his birth, were in the obedience of the 	1
at the time when I took the liberty of applying to you. I 	1
At the time when Robert Bruce began his reign in 1306. 	1
at the uproar, and filled with the utmost terrour on 	1
At the very time that Mary was secretly carrying on 	1
At the very time when these passions fermented, with August. 	1
At this period of his life he was accustomed to rise 	1
At this time the regent called a parliament, in order August 18 	1
at this unexpected and barbarous execution, but the 	1
a turbulent people, during the absence of their sove- 	1
at what distance I am ranked below my companions and 	1
at what he had done, or might do, in order to accom- 	1
at what times and under what pretext they returned, 	1
at York, Elizabeth now added sir Nicholas Bacon, 	1
Aug. 22. Soon after his return from Lochlevin, Murray ac- 	1
Aug. 25. rival in Scotland. The reformed doctrine, though esta- 	1
augmented about this time by the arrival of the count 	1
August 31. to arms. The queen did not suffer them to remain long 	1
August, chapel at Holyrood house. The multitude of those 	1
ault, who was already extremely disgusted with the 	1
Austria and kings of Bohemia, and were in possession 	1
Austrian princes, which would have added so much to 	1
author and his friends were prosecuted in the ecclesi- 	1
authority. All things were conducted there with de- 	1
authority, as well as penetration, of the heads of the 	1
authority for rectifying these multiplied abuses n . 	1
authority. In order to quiet the minds of those who 	1
authority in Scotland, they observed, would render her 	1
authority. Never was any race of monarchs so unfor- which hap- 	1
authority of a regent, without the envy of the name. He jj 1011 	1
authority of the church, and the decrees of councils. 	1
authority of their sacred character, they hoped effec- 	1
authority of their sovereign, which they had no right 	1
authority of the king's courts". 	1
authority of the nobles, which was the object both of 	1
authority. The French had the advantage of seeing 	1
authority, the title and dignity of king, or by a simple 	1
authority. This induced her to consent to a measure 	1
authority to the utmost of her power y . Mary, by her 	1
authority which he had acquired, his repeated attempts 	1
authority, would have armed her with power to destroy 	1
authorized by the pernicious casuistry of the Roman 	1
author of their own sufferings. This common hatred 	1
authors of that age impute his untimely death to poison ; 	1
authors of the review gave up their labours in despair. 	1
authors of these rumours did not confine their accu- 	1
authors of those ages have perfectly imbibed the sen- 	1
avail herself of all these advantages could not, in the 	1
Avarice mingled itself with their concern for the in- 	1
avarice of those who had been appointed to collect and 	1
avarice. The people, inflamed with the most violent 	1
avarice, with which the reformation was then loaded by 	1
a vein of wealth was opened to him, which all the ex- 	1
avenue, the French might have made their way into 	1
averse from an alliance which, by securing to them the 	1
averse from labour, and unacquainted with the arts of 	1
averse from reconcilement. At the union, in one thou- 	1
averse to it, was the liberty which, as they supposed, 	1
aversion for the match grew into abhorrence ; and, ex- 	1
aversion to popery, and approving of every scheme 	1
a very dangerous distemper, and who was still so feeble 	1
a very different reception in a more enlightened period. 	1
avidity of those who desired their instructions. Among 	1
A view of shaking the throne and endangering the kingdom. The 	1
a view to please the queen ; but it is worded with such studied dexterity, 	1
a violent storm, and had either perished on the coast of 	1
avoidable, and must fall at last with redoubled weight. 	1
avoidable. As the contending parties could seldom 	1
avoided mentioning that, her cause gained as much as 	1
avoid the danger and fatigue of a siege, she committed 	1
avoid the fury of the inhabitants, by retiring out of the 	1
avowed and justified would bring upon the kingdom ; 	1
avowed approbation and strenuous support of a mea- 	1
avowed disobedience, and instantly committed several 	1
aware of the dangerous designs which the princes of 	1
a war of emulation and resentment, rather than of in- 	1
away, as it were with her own hands, the sceptre which 	1
a way to succeed him in that high dignity. Her bro- 	1
awe her partisans, they still reserved to themselves the 	1
aWJala, 161. Crawf. Mem. 106. 	1
a younger son and six daughters totally unprovided for, 	1
bable some man of letters at Paris may think that a transla- 	1
bably would: for he must then conjecture that the affair could 	1
back as the feudal customs can be traced, held these 	1
back into their own country, and no foreign troops be 	1
back to Glasgow, and returned public thanks to God 	1
back with disgrace, seized their cannon, and, pursuing 	1
bad consequences from persisting in a measure which I 	1
baillis,' or royal judges : all the other lands, towns, and baillages, belonged 	1
Baliol, the grandson of Margaret the eldest daughter. 	1
Baliol, who, relying on the aid of England, and on the 	1
b Anders, vol. iv. 14. See Appendix, No. XXV. 	1
band, James the fourth. In that age, the right and 	1
band of faithful and determined adherents. 	1
band to the m some sor t ratified in parliament. But in a kingdom 	1
band, without directly mentioning his name ; yet Mary 	1
banished from the university to the school. That, even 	1
banishment; and, through her connivance, the pro- 	1
banishment into which she had been obliged with re- 	1
banks of the river Eske. Both these circumstances 	1
bany, he, in a phrensy of rage, drew his dagger, and 	1
bar; and as he had many dependents in that corner, 	1
bar. And the fate of a kingdom, whose power her 	1
barbarous a . Morton, equally guilty of the same crime, 	1
Bar, Dreghorn, Pitarrow, Comptroller, and the tutor of Pitcur. Knox, 382. 	1
baron assembled his vassals, and wasted the lands or 	1
barons, and a great assembly of the people. From 	1
barons, and representatives of boroughs, who adhered 	1
barons likewise possessed in an ample manner. These 	1
barons would have been cemented by dividing its spoils. 	1
bar, who discovered greater fidelity, was soon forced 	1
bassador, dismissed his forces; and an expedition, 	1
bassadors, Elizabeth, by that deed, would have acquired 	1
bastard brother, who had been guilty of rebellion ; and 	1
bate, which admirably displays the talents and character 	1
bation of this match, which, he said, was no less accept- 	1
battle. Between the two armies, and on the road to- 	1
Battle of Mary's imprudence in resolving to fight, was not 	1
Battle of tient at the sight of an enemy. The general was afraid 	1
battles were "fought, and the Scots, though often van- 	1
Bayonne, encouraged her to take a step, which, if we 	1
b Crawf. Mem. 111. Melv. 202. 	1
B Crawf. Peer. 35$) 	1
be able to rival his power, and excite his oppressed 	1
be all communicated to me ; and I have had an offer of access 	1
be altogether indifferent or uninstructive to us. 	1
bear so strict a scrutiny as must be made into it, if they 	1
bears the epigraph, " Vita sine literis mors est ;" from 	1
bear the first overture of a match with a subject. Her t j," s ec 	1
bear to be stripped of that appellation by which his fa- 	1
beaten on the field of fair argument, now leagued them- 	1
Beatoun. ftn j c h arac t e r, than the earl of Arran and cardinal Bea- 	1
Beatoun The cardinal, however, was now in possession of every 	1
Beatoun to sidered as prime minister, was the first that claimed 	1
Beatoun, were, about this time, recalled by her from 	1
be both ungenerous and inhuman. The horrours of a 	1
became complete ; and inclination now prompted her 	1
became interwoven, and their interests were often the 	1
became more fatal than the enmity of England; and 	1
became more inured to war than even the rest of their 	1
became more servile than ever. What was only a temporary device, in the 	1
became the foundation of the strictest union with the 	1
became too great. But what they concerted with much 	1
became universal. Few victories in a civil war, and 	1
because all ranks of men were accustomed to obey them. 	1
because he was the duke of Norfolk's brother-in-law, 	1
be celebrated in different parts of the kingdom, ibid ; and declared that she 	1
become confederates, had grown into confidence with 	1
become dependent on that nation. He was desirous 	1
becomes an object of attention to foreigners ; and with- 	1
become the object of doubt or of dispute ; the eager 	1
becoming a virtuous Christian. Towards the concluding 	1
be considered not only as a favourite, but as a minister. 	1
be decided with certainty. Records have therefore 	1
be defended without great expense and danger. 	1
Bedford. 	1
been able to restrain? If it once broke loose, the au- 	1
been accustomed to mock battles only, and to decide 	1
been, against the temptations of interest ; and the pos- 	1
been agreed upon between them; by the latter, be- 	1
been alarmed at the first clamours raised against their 	1
been a man of a weak understanding and violent pas- 	1
been better to have said, which Wolsey, etc. That 	1
been bravely defended against the other. A point of so 	1
been carried on without any aid from Elizabeth, and 	1
been carried on without the secret disgust and mur- 	1
been cleared by the most unexceptionable and satis- 	1
been communicated to Huntly and Bothwell, and they 	1
been compelled to abandon an husband so unworthy of 	1
been devoted towards the acquirement of a pure Eng- 	1
been educated in England ; all of them had borrowed 	1
been either unknown to the queen, or disagreeable to her ; we may observe 	1
been enabled, in many instances, to correct the inac- 	1
been evident, and has always decided the contest. On 	1
been formerly stipulated. 	1
been, in any degree, equal to his confidence, the de- 	1
been matter of public discourse, the first conjectures 	1
been most defective. 	1
been not only just but necessary. The introducing 	1
been of much weight in the affairs of Scotland, was 	1
been on the jury which acquitted Bothwell, obtained 	1
been present. This could not be owing to Elizabeth's instructions to 	1
been raised among the English. In this light it seems 	1
been rivals in power, during the reign of Francis the 	1
been searched, original papers have been produced, 	1
been so strangely reduced by our modern reformers, I am 	1
been suggested by considerations merely political. 	1
been swallowed without examination, and believed con- 	1
been taken prisoners in the battle, were tried, and con- 	1
been taught, by the fatal experiment of her former mar- 	1
been the chief sufferers under the king's administration, 	1
been then altogether unknown. 	1
been the occasion of this meeting. He was instructed 	1
been the real one, it is hardly possible to conceive that he should have neg- 	1
been treated by the cardinal with injustice and con- 	1
be examined with candour, and judged of with impar- 	1
be exempted from this oppressive jurisdiction, and pub- 	1
be extended, and their titles to possessions which they 	1
be extremely different from his own, communicated to 	1
be far from her intention to claim any right of judging 	1
befell one of the Scottish kings first encouraged the 	1
before he could reach Glasgow, he was seized with a Glasgow.** 	1
Before he declared his final resolution, he waited on 	1
before her, and the same insults and reproaches re- 	1
before her time or long after. 	1
before his own death, and in all his long narrative 	1
Before Mary's arrival in Scotland, mutual distrust Resolves 	1
before received the royal assent, what necessity of repeating 	1
before she set out for Glasgow, no tokens of sudden 1567. 	1
before the birth of Christ ; and give a particular detail 	1
before the council ; but the examination was conducted 	1
before their forces could assemble, the ardour of their 	1
before their leaders. But, in a short time, the doctrines 	1
before their power had time to take root and grow up 	1
before them, obtained an act, appointing four persons to be named out of 	1
before the queen's face. The earl of Morton, the lord 	1
before the society in Scotland for propagating Christian knowledge, January 	1
before this ecclesiastical court, would be a task tedious 	1
before your book arrived at Paris. He tells me that the abbe 	1
be formidable to neither. It is evident from all these 	1
be found in any other history. They left, in the opi- 	1
be found, on a review, to be unjust ; and, by many other 	1
began, by degrees, to feel and to murmur at their en- 	1
began her flight ; and so lively were her impressions of 	1
began his 	1
began his public ministry at St. Andrew's, in the year 	1
began to alter. For although I did think, and I do 	1
began to assume a regular form. Its principles had"^ 	1
began to carry on private negotiations with the queen ; 	1
began to grow less tractable than formerly, and scrupled 	1
began to suspect his intention ; promises, flattery, and 	1
began visibly to decline in favour, and the constable 	1
beginning of the reign of James the sixth" 1 , they amount- 	1
begun with it. I care not to boast, but I will venture to 	1
behalf. In his situation, and in a matter which Eli- 	1
behalf. She declared her resolution to live in per- 	1
behaviour ^ e excess f n ^ s caprice, as well as of his folly. He 	1
behaviour of subjects towards a ruler who abuses his 	1
behaviour would render the first approach of forbidden 	1
be held March 12, 1566, and that the lords of articles were chosen, and 	1
beheld the favour, due to them, bestowed on such un- 	1
beheld with concern a throne, to which the queen of 	1
beheld, with the utmost impatience, those who had^ 600 6 J ea * 	1
behind her a garrison of six hundred men, with orders 	1
behold a parliament, in its first rudiments, and observe 	1
be huddled up in this manner, merely to suppress dis- 	1
be impossible for me to steer through Gowrie's conspiracy with- 	1
being accessory to the murder of her husband. She 	1
being afraid of the hackney translators of Holland and Paris ; 	1
being appointed lord-lieutenant of all the counties be- 	1
being brought under the necessity of answering the 	1
being committed to the great officers of the crown, the 	1
being confined there upwards of nine months, he was 	1
being conquered. 	1
being favourable to the captive queen. They were, 	1
being free men, and not slaves, could be tried by their 	1
being in sight of the English fleet. Mem. ap. Jebb. xi. 455. 	1
being reduced entirely to the profession of an author. 	1
being repulsed by his passion and seriousness, I direct them 	1
being restored to her kingdom ; in order to which, she 	1
be introduced into the house. This committee owed 	1
be kept long concealed, he attempted to deceive her 	1
be left in Perth, and no French soldier should approach 	1
belief, were proposed to the people, without any attempt 	1
believe you have afforded me very small materials for 	1
bellions and civil wars. To nobles haughty and inde- 	1
bellish the discourse of the Scottish queen with any 	1
belonged to the house of Burgundy. The Burgundian 	1
belonging to the provost of a collegiate church, called 	1
belongs not to any part, but to the whole, or at least 	1
beloved of all the nobility, an effectual remedy seemed ~ 	1
be made" 7 seemm g attention to her dignity as a queen, soothed, 	1
be made of Mary's power and pretensions to invade her 	1
be made the instrument of tearing asunder so violently 	1
be more delightful to the restless spirit of Philip, or 	1
be more natural than the regent's solicitude, to know~ 	1
be necessary for preserving the liberty and independence of the kingdom. 	1
benefices, alienated them to their children; who, when they acquired 	1
benefit to * ^ or want f skill or of leisure to improve it. Every new 	1
be no less the office of divines than of laymen, the 	1
Bentinck-street, Nov. the 3rd, 1779. 	1
bents to their natural children. 	1
bents, to whatever party they adhered, were allowed to 	1
bent upon any design. He wrote to the two earls to 	1
be opulent. Commerce made little progress in the 	1
be passed at that time ought to be deemed illegal and 	1
b Epist. Reg. Scot. vol. ii. p. 308. 	1
be pleasant to the historian, and I am inclined to believe 	1
be present at a conference upon the points in doctrine, 	1
be procured without extreme difficulty. From the time 	1
be publicly recognised, until she herself should declare 	1
be put into his hands during her minority. 	1
berally towards carrying on a war with England, and 	1
be reckoned among the most bitter circumstances in 	1
be reprobated, and one of the more rigorous carried 	1
be restored. 	1
be revenged upon the regent. Party-rage strengthened 	1
ber from the pleasure he had received from the reading of 	1
ber of her partisans, and paved her way towards the 	1
ber of the chief persons in the kingdom would render 	1
bers, had again recourse to negotiation. She found, 1559. 	1
bers, of whom two hundred and one are- ministers, and 	1
bers, published in July and December, 1756, they were 	1
bers was to cultivate the study of public speaking, and 	1
bers were but few in number, and of no considerable 	1
bert Cotton, or are extant in the public offices in Eng- 	1
ber. The spirit of Knox, however, still remained un- 	1
bertson, being convinced of the equity of the law of 	1
bert the second. Skirmishes and inroads of little con- 	1
berty and happiness of the nation cannot be secured ~ 	1
berty, or inflamed with that ardour which accompanies 	1
Berwick and Roxburgh only, 	1
beseech her to render the friendship between the na- 1560. 	1
Besides, our manner of viewing the same subject is so 	1
Besides these territories in Germany, Charles was heir 	1
besiege the castle. An accommodation, however, en- 	1
Be so good as to present my sincere compliments to Mr. 	1
be spread over the present fire, God knows, I am heart- 	1
b Essays on Brit. Antiq. 174. Annals of Scotland, by sir David Dal- 	1
best families *. The connexion between superior and 	1
bestowed on him, gave him any title. He was perpe- 	1
bestowed on many. Those who had not themselves 	1
bestowed upon Bothwell. Notwithstanding her at- 	1
bestowed upon foreigners. Among these, her brother, 	1
be taken by directions from the person who was him- 	1
beth, and induced her to forego any advantage which 	1
beth, and to solicit her consent to the marriage with 	1
beth, and undertook to produce such proofs of her 	1
be the consequence of a public accusation against 	1
be the effect, at this juncture, of Throkmorton's inter- "~ 	1
be the men whom the bishops would choose, and, of consequence, the whole 	1
be the occasion of bringing any stain upon your repu- 	1
beth had detained him in England for some months, 	1
beth herself q . His reserve and hesitation were no less 	1
beth promised, whatever should be the issue of this 	1
beth's assistance, are urged, with great force, in a paper of Maitland's. 	1
beth, she was far from suspecting that any bad conse- 	1
beth's possession of the throne, nothing could be more 	1
beth's pre- 	1
beth, to whom they had secretly despatched a messen- 	1
beth was informed of these ; and, though she suspected 	1
beth was prudent enough not to admit into her king- 	1
beth x , were endeavouring to raise their followers in the 	1
betook themselves to some secular employment. The 	1
better than usually falls to the lot of men of studious 	1
better weapons than other passions and prejudices of 	1
between a king and hi's nobles was almost entirely lost j om&gt; 	1
between England and Scotland ; for which they should have a good oppor- 	1
between Forth and Tay. The inhabitants of Perth 	1
between her 111 ^ , ^ i .., 	1
between Mary and her subjects, or of degrading her 	1
between sovereigns and their subjects, the queen for- 	1
between the king and nobles seems almost entirely to 	1
between them ; and the authority which she inherited 	1
between the two nations, an aversion for the French 	1
between the two parties, and who was endeavouring 	1
be well accompanied, and her authority sufficiently fortified, by the con- 	1
be wrote ? Thus, I should say, a history, and an his- 	1
beyond their utmost ability to accomplish. The French gregation 	1
beyond the rank of subjects. 	1
b Good, vol.i. 140. Melv. 154. Keith, Pref. viii. &gt; Ibid. 562. 	1
b Good. vol. i. 186. 284. 350. 	1
bids the use of any written assistance to the preacher, 	1
bigot a , servilely devoted to the house of Guise, and a 	1
bigoted attachment to the Romish faith. The genius 	1
bilious projects, arid the united forces of France and ~ 	1
bility, and even her husband, were excluded from any 	1
bility. He did not relinquish the design, and he en- 	1
bility that Mary could bring proofs of her innocence, 	1
bility, the disaffection of the clergy, and the rage of 	1
bility ; were the motives which they alleged to justify 	1
bill altogether. Persuaded of the truth of what they 	1
B^ioTexa- d and heir to *" s crown, did not long survive him. The 	1
Birth of On the nineteenth of June, Mary was delivered of 	1
bishop departed from those humane maxims, by which 	1
bishop of Ross. The former readily closed with a 	1
bishop of St. Andrew's, and the partizans of the house 	1
bishop of St. Andrew's encouraged this pacific disposi- 	1
bishop of St. Andrew's, the jurisdiction of which the 	1
bishops, abbots, and the greater ecclesiastics, who, 	1
bishops, houses and countries, on that side of the water thereabout, and to 	1
bition: by long experience he had acquired address 	1
bition. He foretold the extinction of the true catholic 	1
bition, he might have established despotism in Eng- 	1
bition of those who governed him, might so easily dis- 	1
bition or furthering the pretensions of her daughter-in- 	1
bitious spirits, and incensed against James, who treated 	1
bitterly than ever of their poverty. The army, it is 	1
b , Keith, 403. note (b). ' Cald. vol. ii. 53. Crawf. Mem. 35. 	1
B Keith, Pref. viii. 	1
b Knox, 180. 	1
b Knox, 287. 	1
b Knox ; Buchanan ; Keith, 208. 	1
Blackwood dwells upon it with the most indecent tri- 	1
blasted the reputation, and diminished the authority of 	1
ble and magnificent which had escaped its violence 1 . 	1
ble any woman could bear or forgive. Cold civilities, 	1
bled at Hamilton, and seemed to be entering into some 	1
bled their followers, but with the same dispositions 	1
bleman had involved his country in a civil war ; which 	1
bleman who ventured to converse with him, he was left 	1
ble of how much importance it would be, not only to 	1
bles, and the impatient ambition of the competitors, 	1
bles in the northern and midland counties were often 	1
blessing, and gave hopes of its perpetuity. 	1
bles^ "taking a review of their reigns, that almost every one 	1
ble station allowed them only a distant access to the 	1
bles was interested, being determined by judges ap- 	1
bles, were in her retinue. Catherine, who secretly re- 	1
ble, violence, they fell upon the churches in that city, ~ 	1
bling the patience and fortitude of the primitive mar- 	1
bling those pagan originals whence it had been copied. 	1
blished, and the possession of land was the pay which 	1
blished by law in England. The accession of a queen, 	1
blished church. They had followed the queen, during 	1
blished church to continue in this state of indigence 	1
blished over all the kingdom by the parliament, which 1561. 	1
blished rules of the constitution. 	1
blished the power of Great Britain on a firm founda- 	1
blishes the right of England to interpose in the affairs 	1
blishing religion by law was not to be neglected. They 	1
blish the popish religion ; and the restoring the ancient 	1
blood be allied unto the cardinal ; and, if ye see any likelyhood to win the 	1
blood. Bothwell, on account of the personal injuries 	1
blood of their ancestors. They received this proposal 	1
blood, who, by residing in Scotland, might preserve 	1
bloom of youth, and considerable as the territories were, 	1
blow. No man was desirous of a victory, which would 	1
b Melv. 179. 	1
board a ship which he provided, and of flying into 	1
bodin in feir of war in the most substantious manner, [i. e. completely ' 	1
body (as I may say) their ideas for them, the historian would 	1
body. Buchanan adds, that Abernethy, the king's physician, plainly de- 	1
body of his adherents, who, presenting their spears to 	1
body of his troops was cut to pieces, and the rest dis- 	1
body of men towards Aberdeen, to which place the 	1
body of regular troops might have proved formidable 	1
body of troops, by his command, seized and fortified 	1
body of well-disciplined troops at her command, and 	1
body so firm and compact as the Scots easily resisted 	1
bold action, to deliver themselves and their country 	1
bold designs, and was no less master of that political 	1
boldest remonstrances to their sovereigns. While arms 	1
bold genius led him to some useful discoveries, which 	1
boldness of the attempt. Early in the morning they May 20, 	1
Bolls of corn 850 	1
Bolton. complaints, she was conducted to Bolton, a castle of 	1
bond of that union with Elizabeth, which was of so 	1
BOOK HI. OF SCOTLAND. 177 	1
BOOK Hi. OF SCOTLAND. 181 	1
BOOK HI. OF SCOTLAND. 183 	1
BOOK HI. OF SCOTLAND. 191 	1
BOOK HI. OF SCOTLAND. 199 	1
BOOK HI. OF SCOTLAND. 209 	1
BOOK HI. OF SCOTLAND. 223 	1
BOOK HI. OF SCOTLAND. 237 	1
BOOK HI. OF SCOTLAND. 247 	1
BOOK HI. OF SCOTLAND. 251 	1
BOOK HI. OF SCOTLAND. 277 	1
BOOK i. 	1
BOOK ii. 	1
BOOK IIL OF SCOTLAND. 189 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 101 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 103 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 105 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. . 107 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 109 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 115 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 117 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 119 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 121 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 123 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 12.5 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 127 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 131 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 133 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 139 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 141 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 149 	1
BOOK ii, OF SCOTLAND. 151 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 153 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 157 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 159 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 163 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 165 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 169 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 79 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 83 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 89 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 91 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 93 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 95 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. 97 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. IIS 	1
BOOK ii. OF SCOTLAND. Ill 	1
BOOK in. 	4
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND: 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 	2
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 173 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 179 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 185 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 187 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 193 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 195 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 201 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 203 	1
BOOK in. , OF SCOTLAND. 205 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 207 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 211 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 213 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 215 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 225 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 227 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 231 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 235 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 241 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 243 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 245 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 249 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 255 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 257 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 261 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 265 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 267 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 269 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 271 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 273 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 275 	1
BOOK in. OF SCOTLAND. 2G3 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 11 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 13 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 15 	1
Book i. OF SCOTLAND. 17 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 19 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 21 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 23 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 25 	1
BOOK i, OF SCOTLAND. 27 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 29 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 31 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 33 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 35 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 37 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 39 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 41 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 43 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 45 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 47 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 51 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 53 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 57 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 59 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 61 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 65 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 67 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 69 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 7 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 71 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 73 	1
BOOK i. OF SCOTLAND. 75 	1
BOOK ir. OF SCOTLAND. 129 	1
BOOK ir. OF SCOTLAND. 143 	1
BOOK ir. OF SCOTLAND. 155 	1
BOOK ir. OF SCOTLAND. 81 	1
BOOK ir. OF SCOTLAND. 99 	1
BOOK it. OF SCOTLAND. 161 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 281 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 283 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 285 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 287 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 289 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 291 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 293 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 295 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 297 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 299 	1
BOOK iv. . OF SCOTLAND. 301 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 303 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 305 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 307 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 309 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 311 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 313 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 315 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 317 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 319 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 321 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. , 323 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 325 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 327 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 329 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 331 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 333 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 335 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 337 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 339 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 341 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 343 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 345 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 347 	1
BOOK iv. OF SCOTLAND. 349 	1
BOOK m. OF SCOTLAND. 	1
BOOK m. OF SCOTLAND. 175 	1
BOOK m. OF SCOTLAND. 197 	1
BOOK m. OF SCOTLAND. 217 	1
BOOK m. OF SCOTLAND. 253 	1
BOOK n. 	1
BOOK n. OF SCOTLAND. 135 	1
BOOK n. OF SCOTLAND. 137 	1
BOOK n. OF SCOTLAND. 147 	1
BOOK n. OF SCOTLAND. 167 	1
BOOK n. OF SCOTLAND. 85 	1
BOOK n. OF SCOTLAND. 87 	1
BOOK nr. OF SCOTLAND. 219 	1
BOOK nr. OF SCOTLAND. 259 	1
BOOK r. OF SCOTLAND. 49 	1
BOOK r. OF SCOTLAND. 5 	1
BOOK r. OF SCOTLAND. 55 	1
BOOK r. OF SCOTLAND. 63 	1
BOOK r. OF SCOTLAND. 9 	1
books) both may maintain their own rank, have their 	1
bookseller of London is very strict in not showing the same 	1
BOOK v. 	5
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 351 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 353 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 355 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 357 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 361 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 363 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 365 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 367 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 369 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 371 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 373 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 375 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 377 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 379 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 381 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 383 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 385 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 387 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 389 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 391 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 393 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 395 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 397 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 399 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 401 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 403 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 405 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 407 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 409 	1
BOOKV. OF SCOTLAND. 411 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 413 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 4-15 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. 417 	1
BOOK v. OF SCOTLAND. S59 	1
booty, and delivered the city from this dreadful alarm. 	1
borderers with so much courage, and established such 	1
borders; delivering the kingdom, in a few days, from 	1
borious, and extensive as the work must be, he would 	1
borne the worst imputations in silence, rather than 	1
borrowed his account of this expedition. Life of Edward the sixth, 279, etc. 	1
both appealed to history and records, and from these 	1
both continued among a great party in the nation, but, seize the 	1
both equally credulous. Not many years after, Bu- 	1
both honour and humanity called so loudly on his~ 	1
both,) I have no objection to your supplying the one and cor- 	1
both kingdoms. The prior of St. Andrew's was the 	1
both. Notwithstanding their solicitude to conciliate the 	1
both of God and of nature, that every society hath a 	1
both of reputation and of power to the party. These 	1
both parties. He received the queen herself with the 	1
both queens had recourse by turns, that Mary avoided, 	1
both relish his plan, and concur, with all their influence, 	1
both soldiers and subjects, civil privileges and immuni- 	1
Both the ... 	1
Both the British nations lost power, as well as repu- 	1
Both the queen and Bothwell thought it of advan- 	1
Both these noblemen aspired to the crown ; and their 	1
both to herself and to the persons of greatest credit in 	1
Bothwell, all this while, was the queen's prime confi-Herattach- 	1
Bothwell, and Lennox was called upon to make good 	1
Both well b . He could hope for no success in those bold 	1
Bothwell had acquired, and observed the queen's grow- 	1
Bothwell, May 17. Keith, 386. But this remonstrance of lord Herries 	1
Bothwell not guilty of the crime. 	1
Bothwell not only to enjoy personal liberty, but to re- 	1
Bothwell of g eance &gt; w i tn incessant importunity. This nobleman 	1
Bothwell's address. It is observable, that amidst all 	1
Bothwell should be reviewed by the proper judges, 	1
Bothwell's innocence, and the most ample acknowledg- 1567. 	1
Bothwell's measures. While he resided at Glasgow, 	1
Bothwell was now one of the greatest subjects in the 	1
Both were intrusted, however, with something more 	1
Botnwell *L , . . 	1
Boulogne out of the hands of the English ; and the in- 	1
bound, by the condition of their tenure, to attend and 	1
bounded confidence. But, even by her enemies, these 	1
bounded confidence, which his strenuous adherence to 	1
bound himself to repeal the act which had passed for 	1
bound, however, to perform all feudal services, and, of 	1
boundless field of fancy and conjecture, the historian 	1
bounds, either in severity or in duration. For this 	1
bound to plead her cause. But Elizabeth put a very 	1
bounty, great accessions of wealth and power were 	1
bounty had conferred upon Murray to escape him '. 	1
bour and ally, from whom she had received repeated 	1
boured to destroy its effects, by a counter-proclama- 	1
bouring provinces to raise as many troops as were 	1
bour to bring all differences to an accommodation. As 	1
Boyd arrived from England ; and, besides the letters 	1
b Parl. 6 Jac. IV. c. 62. c Anders, vol. iv. part ii. 61. 	1
bracing the protestant opinions ; and summoned several 	1
bravery and good conduct, a service of the utmost im- 	1
breach with Murray and all his adherents. The par- 	1
breaks n Ct * nto anv re gul ar body. He assembled an army with 	1
breaks the mind for political servitude ; and the doc- 	1
brethren, composed the first book of discipline, which 	1
brics almost level with the ground. This riotous in- 	1
bridge. Among the most remarkable of those who had 	1
bring her to some explicit declaration of her sentiments, 	1
bring his court to fall in with her views. Among other 	1
bringing the queen to offer pardon for what was past, 	1
Britain. These circumstances not only influenced Ar- 	1
Britain, they found it possessed by the Caledonians, a 	1
broken. 	1
broken, and, by this event, the chief bond of union 	1
broken, and parcelled out among nobles, acquired firm- 	1
Broken by 	1
broken on the slightest pretences. In a very short time, 	1
broke out into open mutiny. The most eminent leaders 	1
brook such a mortifying affront. His hopes of success 	1
brother, a youth of eighteen. As her manners were 	1
brother of her former husband ; and she could not bear 	1
brother's chamber, and, opening the gates to the queen 	1
brother, the count de P. who is two years younger, began 	1
brought against a person, who claimed a preferable 	1
brought a great deal of very troublesome, though not 	1
brought along with it no advantage that could justify 	1
brought over their forces was still in Scotland, and, 	1
brought to a decision immediately after hearing the 	1
brought under much disreputation, was little able to 	1
brought, without difficulty, to approve of this resolu- 	1
bruary was mentioned in the indictment, as the day on 	1
Brussels, and which had hitherto been kept secret. Si 	1
b The dread of the French power did, on many occasions, surmount the 	1
b The reverend S. Hill, D. D. principal of St. Mary's college in the uni- 	1
b^thTrT-* 1 that intrigue which had kindled such combustion in 	1
Buchan. 341. 	1
Buchan. 369. 	1
Buchan and Strathern, upon different pretexts; and 	1
Buchanan, Murray's faithful adherent, a man whose 	1
Buchanan supposes Mary to have formed a design about this time of de- 	1
build a small fort near Berwick, which was appointed, 	1
building a second wall, which ran between Newcastle 	1
bulky collection of my predecessors. But I have sa- 	1
burgesses, and to these the crown officers were added as usual. If we can 	1
burgh 5 . A blow so fatal and unexpected dispirited 	1
burgh '. A court of justice was held with the accus- 	1
burgh. As intelligence is procured in civil wars with 	1
burgh, during the cessation of hostilities, to enjoy the 	1
burgh friends, two copies of the last three volumes of my 	1
burgh, in consequence of a presentation which he had 	1
burgh, prevented his progress, he wanted neither ge- 	1
burgh, received the royal sanction. But Mary, who 	1
burgh, they, once more, represented to her the dangers 	1
burgh were unacquainted ; but they are of too great length to be inserted 	1
burgh were urged, by which this assembly was declared 	1
burgh with a thousand horse, turned suddenly towards 	1
Burgundian ancestors. His abilities were equal to his 	1
Burke wrote to the author in the following terms : 	1
burn received four thousand crowns, but little to the 	1
Burn. vol. iii. 287. Knox, 221. Haynes, 261. 263. 	1
burthen, an easy expedient was found out. The obliga- 	1
busied with introducing their own laws and manners 	1
business to prepare and to digest all matters, which 	1
But, above all these, the familiarity which Darnly 	1
but a daring and active leader to direct the attack. 	1
But amidst these irregular proceedings, a circum- 	1
but a poor instructor. When the Egyptians called the 	1
But as he could not hope, that under an administra- Conceals it 	1
But as Henry was no less fickle than rash, they 	1
But as I .have departed, in many instances, from 	1
But, as our remote antiquities are involved in the same peculiarly 	1
but as successful, as any she had hitherto employed. 	1
But as the earl of Bedford, and the count de Brienne, 	1
But as the plan which was proposed, gave some sanc- 	1
But, as these inroads were seldom attended with any 	1
but, as they despaired of obtaining the proper remedy 	1
but as your performance and his will be upon plans so 	1
But, at the same time, as it was her manner to involve 	1
but, at the same time, she warned them, amidst their 	1
But, at the same time, they had private instructions to 	1
But, at the Same time, whoever reflects upon the en- 	1
But, at this juncture, the princes of Lorrain were 	1
But, before we proceed to relate the events which 	1
but beyond his utmost power to execute. All the con- 	1
But both the queen and the nobles held fast the riches 	1
But, by this time, the archbishop of St. Andrew's had 	1
but continued to make new acquisitions. 	1
but decisive; and, by her promptitude in executing her^^es to 	1
but, during the three last years, the state of these was 	1
but, during this short interval of tranquillity, they ac- 	1
but easy. Her participation of the guilt of the king's 	1
buted more than any other cause to diminish the royal norities"" 	1
buted, without doubt, to alienate her still further from the'irfemon- 	1
but for themselves ; and, being free in their own coun- 	1
but from such as may probably ensue ; to which he adds, 	1
But, happily for the crown, an active and enterprising 	1
But Henry's rough and impatient temper was inca- 	1
but he wished to be more, and openly aspired to uni- 	1
but his arrival has unluckily fallen on a time of year, and 	1
but his high birth. The example of Henry the eighth it. 	1
But I am now sorry to tell you, that by Murden's State 	1
but I believe it will be safer for me not to go thither, for I 	1
but I believe you are enough acquainted with the country to 	1
But, if the authority of the barons far exceeded its Their power 	1
But if their zeal slackened a little, and suffered a mo- 	1
But, if the sources of their discord were to.be traced 	1
But I have already gratified the eagerness of my cu- 	1
but I have neither lord Cromarty's account, nor any other 	1
But, in an amicable conference, Henry expected, and 	1
buting among such as adhered to him, the vast posses- 	1
But, in order to inspire more universal terrour, the 	1
but insisted, by way of preliminary, on Mary's pro- 	1
but, in spite of the murmurs of the people and the ex- 	1
but instantly determined to retire to some place, at a 	1
but, instead of performing his promise to the queen, 	1
but it appears that he had burnt, razed, and destroyed, in the counties of 	1
But it is not on suspicion alone, that Mary is charged 	1
But James's attachment to favourites rendering him 	1
but lest the French should, in the mean time, receive 	1
But long before the beginning of the fourteenth cen- 	1
But many important papers have escaped the notice 	1
But Mary, whose hopes were naturally sanguine, and 	1
But nothing could remove the king's aversion to his 	1
but not the confidence of friendship, which was all that 	1
But, notwithstanding her declarations in their favour, 1564. 	1
But, notwithstanding this solemn promise, the queen, Breaks a 	1
But, on the first introduction of his system, Knox 	1
But, on the other hand, during Mary's confinement, 	1
But, on the other hand, Mary's affection for Both- 	1
But, on the other hand, several weighty considera- 	1
But, on this occasion, the prior of St. Andrew's, lord 	1
but resided at his own house. The earl of Huntly, con- 	1
but, seizing the greater part of their lands, they took 	1
But the absolute dominion which Bothweil had ac- 1567. 	1
but the concluding ceremony. It depended on the 	1
but the diseases of the mind, when they rise to an 	1
But the effects of these operations of his troops were 	1
but the English considered the Scots as vassals who 	1
but the French laboured to annex to it some solid pri- 	1
But their proceedings, with respect to these, were not 	1
But the people beheld the deplorable situation of their ~ 	1
But the queen having ordered her subjects to march 1565. 	1
But the queen interposed her authority to prevent any 	1
But the regent was now in very different circumr 	1
But these matters are much out of my head. I beg of you 	1
but the valour of the borderers, of whom the army of 	1
But this deep-laid scheme was in a moment discon- Darnly ar- 	1
But this project, which, in a leisure hour, has often amused 	1
But, though considerations of interest first occasioned 	1
But though I have given this character of your work to 	1
But though the laity had contributed, by their own 	1
But though the objects, which, at that time, warmed 	1
but to precipitate the Scots into new engagements with 	1
But to the queen dowager these proceedings ap- The regent 	1
But, under her present circumstances, she was obliged 	1
but under various and strict limitations. The second, 	1
But we may observe how far this proof, though drawn from public records, 	1
But what James had attempted to effect slowly and by 	1
But when these became common, the descendants and 	1
But while the sword, the ultimate judge of all dis- 	1
but without freeing me from my perplexity. This was a man 	1
but without gorous and explicit. She pretended that she was not 	1
But with regard to the Scots, as well as the other 	1
But, with respect to him, this distinction was merely 	1
But you tell me, that Swift does otherwise. To be 	1
by 	1
by act of parliament ; and yet, with that fantastic incon- 	1
by a feeble and commonly an imperceptible bond of 	1
By a fourth act, all new grants of hereditary offices 	1
by allowing me to accept it as a memorial and testimony of a 	1
by all these orders of men. They opposed it with the 	1
By an act made on purpose, they excluded " the regent's 	1
by a new overture of peace, on conditions extremely 	1
by any conditions that would prevent these dangers. 	1
by any other means, had, together with the duke of 	1
by any other means. Such cases seldom exist, and it 	1
by a petition from those who had adopted the principles 	1
by a positive engagement, not to take advantage of any 	1
by appointing him to carry the sceptre before her m . 	1
By a proper distribution of these, many persons of note 	1
by a signal triumph over the democratical faction of 	1
by a small party of the nobility, without acknowledging 	1
By a third, it was enacted that no ' regality/ or ex- 	1
By a third, she substituted some other nobleman in 	1
by caprice more than by principle ; and the passions of 	1
by committing to proper persons the care of his daugh- 	1
by degrees, and the events, which happened during a nd ob- 	1
By don 	1
by Dugald Stewart : 	1
by Elizabeth, or her commissioners. 	1
by engaging James the fourth in that unhappy expedi- 	1
by exerting himself in order to procure for them some 	1
by force of arms; but the issue of it was not more 	1
by foreigners, Mary had reigned in England, without 	1
by French Paris for lodging the king at the Kirk of Field, viz. lest the young 	1
by friendship, and highly respected by him for the talent and eloquence 	1
by her ambassadors, before her tribunal. The regent 	1
by her favour; and she had formed designs no less 	1
by his countrymen, and unassisted by strangers". Few 	1
by his direction, encouraged the two earls, and pro- 	1
By his folly and ingratitude, he lost the heart of a wo- 	1
by his power. The manner in which he exercised the and Both - 	1
by his skill in music. As his dependent condition had 	1
by hopes and promises, inflamed those passions, and 	1
by inclination, to the French interest ; and, in order to 	1
By it the leagues and combinations which we have 	1
by Mary with neglect, usually resided at a distance 	1
by means of his sister, lady Scrope, averse from a mea- 	1
by men of deep insight in the human character, and 	1
by men who had lately seen single monasteries possess- 	1
by Murray and his party r , he was obliged to fly from 	1
By one of these, not only all the vast possessions of 	1
by one of which he was cast out as a criminal, and by 	1
by power and by numbers, could miscarry, or be de- 	1
by pretending a warrant for that purpose from the 	1
by promises and flattery, partly by terrour and force, 	1
by prudent compliances, they might expect it from her 	1
by public proclamations, and abandoned ungenerously 	1
by reciprocal and repeated injuries. The queen, by 	1
by so many remarkable events, there happened one of he " 	1
by some bold action, to anticipate the schemes of their 	1
by some of Mary's attendants, and he had communicated 	1
by some retainers to the court, who still favoured his 	1
by striking the senses, excited more universal disgust. 	1
by such a fruitless and ill-timed application to the 	1
byterian ministers themselves. Boswell, in his life of 	1
byteries (differing in number according to accidental 	1
By that, the parliament were permitted to take into 	1
By the 	1
by the afFrightened clergy, declaimed against the er- 	1
by the appearance of openness and candour, an artifice 	1
by the ascendant which he acquired over him, soon en- 	1
by the assistance of the clergy, the countenance of 	1
by the authority of a king, scorned all subjection to the 	1
by the charms of her beauty, had acquired an entire 	1
by the civilities of the French king, and the caresses of 	1
By the duke 	1
by the effects of this reciprocal passion, rather than by 	1
by the English nobility. Mary's ministers had credu- 	1
by the forces of a more considerable kingdom. The 	1
by the former ; by the latter, every man thought him- 	1
by the former, on account of the articles which had 	1
by their divisions, erected a sort of independent princi- 	1
by their insolence. The Scots, naturally an irascible 	1
by their presence in the parliament which the regent 	1
by their representatives, seldom exercised it. The ex- 	1
by the king and queen with the .utmost coldness, and 	1
by the last treaty, to be razed. The garrison of Ber- 	1
by the late treaty, or which seemed necessary to render 	1
by the malicious policy of Edward the first of Eng- 	1
by the most indulgent of parents, I have hitherto re- 	1
by the opinions of the reformers, growing every day 	1
by the other. The pretensions of the earl of Lennox 	1
by the perusal of it ; for although a great part of its subject 	1
by the petulant and saucy demeanour of Tamworth, the 	1
by the powerful intercession of Knox, they obtained 	1
by the prince's baptism had exhausted the queen's trea- 	1
by the prospect of returning to England, to publish the last 	1
by the publication of an anonymous translation at Glas- 	1
By the publication of the History of Scotland, Dr. 	1
by the queen. His representation of the state of the 	1
by the queen, offering a considerable reward to any 	1
by the queen of Scots, were carefully compared " for 	1
by the queen's favour upon him alone. In order to"~ 	1
by the queen to enter himself prisoner in the castle of 	1
by the queen to transmit in writing an account of the conspiracy, which he 	1
by the reformed teachers, for applying these revenues 	1
by these alone. The effects of the violent measures of 	1
by these instances of the queen's moderation and hu- 	1
By these reiterated and wanton instances of perfidy, 1559. 	1
by the terrour of his arms. Mercenary troops and stand- 	1
by the vigilance or good fortune of those against whom 	1
by the want of unanimity and vigour ; all its consulta- 	1
by this danger, the king quitted his retirement, took 	1
by those about him, he now suffered himself to be 	1
By those proceedings, it must, however, be confessed, 	1
by touching these, to force him upon many rash and 	1
by violence, and wandering without any certain abode ; 	1
By what action could it be pretended that Mary had 	1
by which, failing the heirs of her own body, she con- 	1
by which he fell, was not yet ripe for execution ; and 	1
by which he reached the high rank that he holds 	1
by which they could censure him without condemning 	1
by working upon his fears. The desertion of the no- 	1
By yielding some things to the interest, and more to 	1
c2 	1
cabals and insurrections among the former ; and might 	1
c Aber. ii. 540. 	1
cabin, nor taste food, but commanding a couch to be 	1
cairn, and sir Hugh Campbell of Loudon, to expostu- 	1
calculated, in appearance, to promote ; could not, under 	1
Cald. vol. ii. 48, 49. " Keith, 401. 	1
Caledonians. About the beginning of the fifth century, 	1
cal functions for a few weeks. The sentence passed 	1
called a meeting of parliament ; and, in order that a 	1
called him forth, to act a principal part on a more pub- 	1
called in question, he weakened his own title to the 	1
called into England, and consent to their being heard 	1
called to the throne while they were minors, and almost 	1
calmly and with attention. Wherever I perceived that 	1
calumny; and disclaimed all thoughts of that kind, 	1
Camd. 401. 	1
Camd. 419. Haynes, 573. State Trials, i. 73. 	1
Camden seems to be the least accurate, and the worst founded. He -sup- 	1
came in England of equal consideration. That great 	1
came necessary ; one founded on the maxims of the ca- 	1
came to assume the reins of government, he found his 	1
campaign, which had so far exceeded the usual time of 	1
camp of the reformers. The duke, their general, sunk, 	1
can be accomplished without that degree of ardour and pas- 	1
can be expected. The corruptions of a society, recom- 	1
c Anderson's Historical Essay concerning the independency, etc. 	1
c Anders, vol. i. Tref. 64. Keith, 379. 	1
c Anders, vol. iv. part i. p. 11, 12, etc. 109, etc. Haynes, 468, etc. 	1
can hardly be acquired with the utmost diligence of 	1
can maintain my place in the triumvirate, I am indifferent 	1
cannot be denied that their conduct, so far as regarded 	1
cannot fail of inspiring b ." 	1
canon law made it necessary to obtain the pope's dis- 	1
capable of acting either with unanimity, or with vigour. 	1
capable of answering your desire. M. Suard, a gentleman 	1
capable of conducting an army was chosen to command 	1
capable of performing better such a grand design. Conse- 	1
capable of rendering her administration illustrious, or 	1
capable of using victory with humanity, and of treating 	1
capitulation of Perth ; and was much disappointed at missing 	1
cardinal, and the pretensions of Lennox ; were all re- 	1
cardinal Beatoun found the regent's eldest son in the 	1
Cardinal Beatoun, with the same public pomp which is 	1
cardinal happens to be shed, and ordains them to be 	1
cardinal. He was a natural brother of the regent, with 	1
cardinal of Lorrain having let fall some expressions, 	1
cardinal of Lorrain, whose violent and precipitant coun- 	1
cardinal's activity. He surprised both him and the re- 	1
care, as I do herewith the notes I received from your lordship. 	1
carefully preserved, that the French lawyers and antiquaries have been 	1
Carlos of 	1
carried as a prisoner to Edinburgh. He would soon 1569. 	1
carried on at great expense, and attended with no ad- 	1
carried on, was not, in all probability, unknown to a 	1
carry him to Hermitage castle. Mary instantly flew 	1
carrying their plan into execution. Two papers of this 	1
carrying through the measures which were agreeable 	1
carry it into execution ; but Chesterfield's base treat- 	1
carry off the young queen and cardinal Beatoun into 	1
Carte, vol. iii. 415. v Keith, 504. 510. * Knox, 349. 	1
Carte, vol. iji. 486. 	1
case, a dangerous civil war must have been the certain 	1
case ; she not only visited Henry, but, by all her words 	1
case they should be pursued by any of their enemies ; the other is, that in 	1
case with the bills brought into parliament, even though they 	1
case your majesty would grant unto them a convenient entertainment to 	1
Casteln. 46f Addit. a Labour. 501. 503. 	1
castle, a mutinous baron could defy the power of his so- 	1
castle belonged . 	1
castle, give some stout essay to the same, and, if it be your fortune to get 	1
castle is situated in a small island in the middle of a 	1
castle itself, the monument of Beatoun's power and va- 	1
castle of Edinburgh ; and, as the reward of his trea- 	1
castle of Edinburgh, the strongest fortress in the king- 	1
castle of St. Andrew's ; and, as they needed the pro- 	1
castle of St. Andrew's, and, while the conspirators kept 	1
castle of Stirling, the residence of the queen his mo- 	1
castles and most valuable counties in Scotland 2 . That 	1
Castles, towers, and piles 16 	1
castle, they, without noise or tumult, or violence to any 	1
castle y . 	1
cated to all those who held of the same superior. Thus 	1
cates for her right, even among those who were near 	1
cate. She was before very poor, and known but to few; but 	1
Cathcart, dated July the twentieth, 1762, of which the 	1
Catherine of Medicis accompanied her son ; the duke 	1
Catherine of Medicis, on the other hand, dreaded 	1
catholic faith ; that she would receive the nuncio with 	1
catholic religion, this suited the bigoted schemes which 	1
catholics, both in power and in number ; and, conscious 	1
catholics of Scotland to hope for the same relief on the 	1
cating it to any of his attendants, except Maitland and 	1
cation had been neglected. His private preceptors were 	1
cause. 	1
cause ; and the regent, taking advantage of their situa- 	1
cause became the common cause of princes' 1 . If ever 	1
cause could be tried but in the spiritual courts, and by 	1
cause he had attempted too much, a grateful people 	1
cause. . j 	1
causes 	1
cause she hoped to prevail on him, by gentle treatment, 	1
causes, in rendering the best-concerted measures abor- 	1
causes of it were those which have already been men- 	1
causes was restrained, and the authority of the court 	1
causes which formerly came under their cognizance f . 	1
cause the refusing of it would then have been a strong pre- 	1
cause ; the vassals of Glencairn, Lennox, and Semple, 	1
cause to Elizabeth, she could not refuse, at her desire, 	1
cause to wonder when it took effect. She expressed marriage 	1
cause which they once reckoned it their honour to sup- 	1
caution of the English, in acting wholly upon the de- 	1
caution r . Their answer was in the same spirit, respect- 	1
caution, she pursued it with a persevering zeal. At this 	1
cautions to be the result of no groundless or unneces- 1559. 	1
cautious maxims, were regarded ; the torrent of national 	1
cavalry, in which the strength of European armies had, 	1
cavalry, were commanded to march to Stirling. Hav- 	1
c Buchanan, 324. d Lesley, de Rebu Gest. Scot. 222. 	1
cc2 	1
c Dugald Stewart's Life of Dr. Robertson. 	1
cealed from Elizabeth. Her jealousy of the Scottish 	1
cealed". Such various and complicated passions raged 	1
cealed with the utmost care, and advanced by address 	1
Cecil's daughters. An account of these wild and chi- 	1
Cecil, who, under the specious pretence of doing him 	1
ceed against those concerned in the murder of Rizio, 	1
ceeded in number, and equalled in dignity, the usual" 	1
ceeded the powers which belong to subjects. . But, 	1
ceeded whatever had been formerly known in Scotland. 	1
ceeding, and protested, that any sentence which should 	1
ceeding reign, did from his daughter Elizabeth ; in that 	1
ceedings against her ; and, while they industriously 	1
ceedings of the confederates, except the approbation 	1
ceedings of the king's party, would engage to protect 	1
ceeding so rapidly towards aggrandizing the crown, are 	1
ceived from Henry, they offered an annual donative of 	1
ceived from the perusal of it, and the gratitude which I owe 	1
ceived opinion ; and the point was of consequence enough to 	1
ceived the congratulations of many individuals of lite- 	1
ceived this scheme. During the conference at York, 	1
ceived to be in imminent danger from the attempts of 	1
ceived with implicit assent and admiration. 	1
ceiving how effectually the present insurrections would 	1
ceiving succours of any kind, and considerably facili- 	1
celebrated writers of his country ; affluence and inde- 	1
cellor, Allan Ramsay, lord Monboddo, David Hume, 	1
Celtae or Gauls ; their affinity to whom appears from 	1
cember the fifteenth, could substitute nothing stronger or more explicit in 	1
ceming the pursue a course less violent. Many of the nobles had 	1
cency, and even severity, of his manners, secured him 	1
cency, and, keeping firm to his ancient allies, left Henry 	1
cency, fled with precipitation towards England l . 	1
cency, must be imputed to an excess either of folly or 	1
censed against their prince, into the field, was to unite 	1
cense to preach is not accompanied with authority to 	1
censure, but with the utmost exultation*. On the other 	1
censure of the abbe de Mably ; both of them are precisely 	1
censure to which their proceedings would be exposed ; 	1
cent actor in that scene of iniquity. Her youth, her 	1
centious, whom they were bound by interest and honour nobles, 	1
cent manner a . The former part of the earl's demand 	1
cent. Those who had the opportunity of his acquaint- 	1
centuries roused the world from that lethargy, in which 	1
cept a Scotsman. 	1
cepted, and the casket seized by Morton d . The con- 	1
cepted by 	1
cepted the office of regent, and began to act in that 	1
ceptionable articles, with an ill-timed rigour, which gave 	1
ception he would give her; and, before his answer Her recep- 	1
ception which this part of the annals, though perhaps the 	1
cept such as were, to the great disgust of the nation, 	1
cept to Albany and his sons, and Lennox. These were 	1
cerity, violate any article in the treaty of truce, or re- 	1
cerning religion. Hurried along by the heat of youth 	1
cerning religion, with advice of parliament, any attempt 	1
cerning the marriage and the union he had projected, 	1
cerning the payment of the thirds of benefices, which 	1
cerning the weakness of the king, and the power of the 	1
cernirig Mary's designs against their religion. She 	1
cernment. 	1
cern that the time of your visits to the metropolis has not 	1
cers. But such was the preposterous ambition of the 	1
certain facility and sweetness of narration, but has loaded his 	1
certainly due to every person accused, was not usual either 	1
certainly neither leisure nor inclination to exercise the func- 	1
certainly to adopt the same measures for abolishing 	1
certed measures for her future conduct suitable to each 	1
certed plan. 4. The most considerable persons of his clan submitted to the 	1
certed. Such unexpected events, as the fancy of poets nves m 	1
cessar to protestants to dethrone a queen, whom all Europe began 	1
cessary step towards the invasion of England. With 	1
cessary to court, counterbalanced all the prudent con- ~ 	1
cess. At last the duke laid siege to Orleans, the bul- 	1
c Essay on the History of Civil Society. 	1
cesses of violence were committed upon churches and 	1
cessful action there may hazard the crown, and over- 	1
cessful in executing a work deemed so pious. Nor did 	1
cessful inroads, and spread terrour and desolation over 	1
cessful war, it would quickly be in a condition for act- 	1
cess; his invention, over-fertile, suggested to him, on 	1
cess. In order to encourage her troops, she herself 	1
cession, and, if well founded, command it to be pub- 	1
cession at his pleasure. The English, jealous of their 	1
cession, from indulgence to the prejudice of the people 	1
cession to continue in the descendants of his younger 	1
cession to the crown ; the defence of the ancient no- 	1
cession, without the concurrence of the French mo- 	1
cessity of the case, as well as the importance of the ob- 	1
cess might encourage you, nor need you be the least intimi- 	1
cessors had too little penetration to discover, or too 	1
cess than his rashness deserved. The protector had 	1
cess, that her affairs began to wear a better aspect, 	1
cester to ri J 	1
cestors endeavoured to get free from the obligation of 	1
chains, and lightened the yoke of popery. The minis- 	1
challenge proved to be a mere bravado. Either the 	1
chamber. Ruthven drew his dagger, and with a fu- 	1
chanan, Calderwood, and Spotiswood. Besides, if the bill had 	1
chanan undertook the same work ; and if his accuracy 	1
chance. This contrivance was manifestly Elizabeth's, 	1
changed. His history will have been published se- 	1
change in favour of her religion. The earls of Lennox, 	1
change required the new printing of a great part of the edi- 	1
changes, and burgesses and knights of the shire ap- 	1
change ; she well knew the character of her mother-in- 	1
changes, not less advantageous to the nobles than to 	1
change which she had made in the national religion. 	1
chapel ; and, besides the legal establishment of the pro- 	1
chapel of her palace. The first rumour of this occa- 	1
character, amused the leaders of the congregation, 	1
character. An aversion from the established church, 	1
character and dominions. Jealous as Elizabeth was of 	1
character declared their intention to have a bill brought 	1
character in that age, and the liberty of appearing in 	1
Character of No two men ever differed more widely in disposition 	1
character of the papal court to open its treasury upon 	1
characters as commissioners, but as private persons, 	1
characters, I have, without hesitation, corrected those 	1
character, who, far from any ambitious scheme of dis- 	1
character without opposition. 	1
charge 1 . At this very time, Murray and the lords who 	1
charge against themselves r : and the nobles had much 	1
charge. But, far from accusing Mary, the regent did 	1
charged her faults so home upon her, that Mary, who 	1
charge of it would be attended, unless he himself con- 	1
charge, or bestowed by the admiration of mankind 	1
charging him with that barbarous action. But the 	1
Charles. 	1
Charles, Ferdinand's third son. The matter was com- 	1
Charles the fifth, and promised to write to you, in order to 	1
Charles the fifth at last made its appearance in 1769, 	1
Charles the fifth, who obtained the imperial crown 	1
Chateau de Ferney. 	1
Chatelherault and the earl of Argyll, concerted mea- 	1
Chatelherault, the earls of Argyll, Glencairn, Rothes, lord Boyd and Ochil- 	1
Chatelherault, with the rest, fixed his residence at 	1
c Haynes, 487. A Anders, vol. iv. part ii. 95. Good. vol. ii. 349. 	1
checked or defeated many of the emperor's designs. 	1
checked the progress of a martial people, though ani- 	1
check the progress of the French in Scotland, but to 	1
check the to consider the most powerful guardian and defender of 	1
check would be given to the pride and luxury of the 	1
chery in deserting Bothwell his patron, obtained terms 	1
Chesterfield said to me he was a great poet. I imagine that 	1
chief and only obstacle to his success in that demand. 	1
chief approved, rushed into the field at his command, 	1
chief direction of her affairs ; subjected to a trial which 	1
chiefly among persons in the lower and middle rank of 	1
chiefly by the furious attack of the Scottish cavalry. 	1
chiefly to their good offices with their sovereign in her 	1
chief offices of state were annexed to great families, 	1
chief part of the queen's faction, being seated in cor- 	1
childish. 	1
children ; and so we may call all those nations which 	1
choice, long before Mr. Hume undertook it, though I 	1
choice of an husband. Maitland, with his usual sa- 	1
choice of the Scottish queen to fall. The revealing of 	1
choice of this author by the partiality, with .which he 	1
choice of this select body, and the king would, of course, have claimed that 	1
choice, she hoped that her reputation, among fo- 	1
choice was left to them ; and they were obliged either 	1
choly and despair succeeded to the furious transports 	1
choose for an husband : and if she should condescend 	1
choose one or two of its citizens to appear, in the name 	1
chosen. 	1
chosen ; and began to take the necessary steps towards 	1
chosen; and, by a subsequent law, the chancellor was declared perpetual 	1
chosen to leave the world, without destining some part 	1
chres of the dead, perished in one common ruin. The 	1
Christianity, was almost the first thing, in the Romish 	1
Christian pastor, for which he was rewarded by the 	1
Christians, seconded the design by his approbation, and 	1
church. 	1
church ; and, in estimating the influence of the popish 	1
church ; and many murmurs against the negligence or 	1
churches and monasteries, and getting possession, by 	1
church, for some years, with a temper and prudence of 	1
church, for two years, have almost escaped our notice. affairs&gt; 	1
church has appointed for the punishment of its ene- 	1
church. having been made for them, they had hitherto drawn a 	1
church, in order to ensure the safety of their own per- 	1
church, I thought, entitled me to take this liberty in a 	1
church lands were let in lease at an easy rent, and were 	1
church of Campvere sends two members, one minister,' 	1
church of Rome were of so much importance to the 	1
church was patronised and established by the state, 	1
church, were delighted with a system so admirably 	1
church, which transfers breach of faith to heretics from 	1
ciates. But the queen, in spite of all their resistance, 	1
ciates to remain in England 6 . Mary, on the other 	1
ciations became so many alliances offensive and defen- 	1
cident happened which inflamed their aversion from 	1
cident would have roused, ran to arms. In a few days, numerous 	1
cient fabric remained, in a great measure, firm and un- 	1
cient inhabitants of the countries which they subdued ; 	1
ciently justified by its success. 	1
cient Rome, I shall retire (in about two months) to Lau- 	1
cies, and gave rise to an union of great advantage to the 	1
cies which had arisen from the rash advancement of 	1
cil, and noblemen conjoined with them, declared that 	1
ciling the queen to the protestant religion. Time might 	1
cils. Murray himself considered this confederacy with 	1
cils of Philip the second, would have produced no 	1
c In the first accounts of Rizio's murder sent to England, there seem to 	1
cio in Scotland could be no other, than to attempt a 	1
cious and more extravagant still remained. The su- 	1
cious princess condemned a measure which was equally 	1
cipal source of all the calamities she had endured for 	1
ciples of the greatest importance, is remarkable. The 	1
ciples, the regent changed his sentiments concerning ^"^8? 	1
cipline. The queen, who watched for such an oppor- 	1
circumscribed prerogative, which the Scottish kings 	1
circumstance here paints and characterizes the manners omen's 	1
circumstance relative to the last could be finally ad- 	1
circumstances concurred with the spirit of the constitu- 	1
circumstances) form a provincial synod. 	1
circumstances of the king's murder spread quickly over 	1
circumstances, that Elizabeth's apprehensions of danger 	1
circumstances which rendered the nobles formidable ; end. 	1
circumstances, which, though they did not balance these 	1
cise no extensive or rigorous jurisdiction. The inter- 	1
cis, had hindered these froni taking effect, yet if Mary 	1
cising their reason, than religion was one of the first 	1
cisive. During the sitting of parliament, he seized, at 	1
citations of the general assemblies of the church, nor 	1
cite a very general interest, he resolved to include in 	1
cited by 	1
cited no jealousy. They, conscious of their own weak- 	1
cited. with the utmost cruelty, in the prime ot his days, and 	1
cite him to aspire to this high dignity. He had receiv- 	1
cities, as in Poland, or none, as in Tartary, there are 	1
Cities no * a little to increase the power of the nobility, and to 	1
citizens not the best laws, but the best laws which they 	1
citizens of Edinburgh, who, being free from the re- 	1
citizens towards their sovereign. But, amidst these 	1
citous to prevent it from becoming common, by being 	1
city, accusing him of the murder, and naming his ac- 	1
city. Notwithstanding the ancient alliance of France 	1
city to the last extremity, when he was assassinated by 	1
city wall, untouched by fire, and with no bruise or 	1
civil and religious, of his country; being but a pro- 	1
civil and religious, which had seized the nation, suffered 	1
civil government ; but, above all, the exorbitant autho- 	1
civil power, the rioters gradually dispersed, having ob- 	1
c Keith, 32. 34. Epist. Reg. Scot. ii. App. 311. Hamilton manuscripts, ' 	1
c Keith, 325. Append. 167. f Thuan. lib. 37. 	1
c Keith, 469. 481. note. d Keith, 475. 	1
c Keith, 504. d Ibid. 510. c Knox, 285. f Lesley, 235. 	1
c Knox, 369. d Keith, 270. Append. 158- 	1
claim any right to the crown of England, during the 	1
claimed, and his authority submitted to without oppo- 	1
claimed a right of nominating whom she pleased to be 	1
claim. Elizabeth was already seated on her throne ; 	1
claim, he seized the public archives, he ransacked 	1
claiming her, by an union with a protestant, was for 	1
claim no jurisdiction in consequence of the commission 	1
claim of toleration for their religion, they now openly 	1
clamations of the preachers, obtained for the queen and 	1
clamation, the twelfth of March was fixed for its meet- n 	1
clamation, which afford such a convincing proof of the feebleness of the 	1
clanships were formed ; and in a generation or two, 	1
claration of royal indulgence, which might be revoked 	1
claration of the queen's intentions ; and as there now 	1
clared, in presence of the French ambassador, their 	1
clared that all licenses which had been obtained from her by any persons, 	1
clared, that it should continue in force only until she should take final order 	1
clared, " that until she should take final orders con- 	1
clared their satisfaction with what he had proposed. 	1
clared the lawful heir of the crown of Scotland ; and, 	1
clared to be void ; and the king was empowered to seize 	1
clare war against England, such was the zeal of his 	1
claring Elizabeth's birth to be illegitimate. Though 	1
classics. But what a fancy is this you have taken of 	1
clay appointed Bothwell appeared, but with such a for- 	1
clear the narrow seas of pirates, which infested them ; and she appeals for 	1
clemency, it must be observed, that only two persons, 	1
clemency, to the queen, added great authority, made a deep im- 	1
clergy* no ^v this new regulation ; they found it to be a more easy 	1
clergy were compared to all those persons who are most 	1
clergy, whether justly or not, had long been charged: 	1
clergy, who would be obliged, henceforward, to confine 	1
clerk of the church. 	1
clesiastical bench 2 , which was entirely under the influ- 	1
clination he discovered to disturb her government, and 	1
clined hazarding an action, the ill success of which 	1
clined some of them to treat the queen with great 	1
clined the conference were plausible, and the juncture 	1
close a copy both of the text, corrected as I intended to pub- 	1
close confederacy with the duke of Albany, and ap- 	1
closed, and her favourite lord Robert Dudley, after- 	1
cluded at Berwick, they endeavoured to render the 	1
cluded, in which it was stipulated that both armies 	1
clude the Scottish line from the right of succeeding to 	1
cluding in the latter class the members from the univer- 	1
cluding the work to be already done, retired to their 	1
clung together, and were distinguished by some com- 	1
clusive right of administering justice within a man's own 	1
c Melv. 125. '' Good. vol. i. 224. 	1
coachman. ' Vanitas vanitatum. atque omnia vanitas.' I shall 	1
coast. In order to be safe from the insults of the Eng- 	1
coast landed, and blasted their premature and short- 	1
coast of Fife, destroying and plundering, with excessive 	1
cognizance of parliament. With regard to religious 	1
cognizance of the king's council, and, being a committee 	1
coin d ; the subverting the ancient laws; the imposing 	1
coined, produced one hundred and eight pounds of current money. But 	1
cola, first carried their arms into the northern parts of 	1
coldness and neglect would merit little censure. In a 	1
coldness of their principal leaders, who were at this 	1
collect any account ; but it may be inferred from the 	1
collection of Murden's. Among other curiosities, there are 	1
College, Feb. 10, 1776. 	1
College, March 13th, 1786. 	1
COLLEGE OF EDINBURGH, 	1
College ofEdinburgh, March 20, 1786. 	1
colouring too favourable. 	1
colours of probability, both from their own resentment, 	1
colour their usurpation of the whole royal authority ; 	1
combat*. 	1
combination against his government, an association for 	1
come at. I am persuaded you have most of these books in 	1
come into- of Europe, who longed to possess something more than 	1
come over to protect the kingdom, taking upon them to French. 	1
come regardless of those objects which he had hitherto 	1
comes under a solemn engagement ' to assert, maintain, 	1
come unavoidable 1 . 	1
comfortable subsistence r . During this year, she issued 	1
comfort and assist their distressed brethren y . One of 	1
command in it ; and, on many occasions, they repented 	1
command of herself, as to receive him not only with 	1
command of the only bridge over the Forth, of great 	1
command would be opened to you ; and that, great, la- 	1
commendator of Dunfermling, and lord Lindsay, were 	1
commendator of Kilwinning, sir John Gordon, of Loch- 	1
commis* * ' 	1
commissioners, at the conference held at York, 1568, pretended that none 	1
commissioners of boroughs, and almost none of the 	1
commission with harshness and brutality. Certain 	1
committed some mistake with regard to this fact, so far as relates to lord 	1
committed this barbarous action. He had been con- m ' 	1
committee was chosen and constituted in such a man- 	1
common as this, of one prince's entering into public 	1
commonly considered as peculiar to ecclesiastics; and 	1
commonly employed by Millar and Strahan to decipher ma- 	1
commonplace books, dated 1735, 1736, 1737, which 	1
commotions in France, on account of religion, were 	1
commotions in Scotland, the fatal termination" of which 	1
companied her in her progresses through different parts 	1
companied Mary in this voyage, confirms the circumstance of her galleys 	1
companied with circumstances which obliged the his- 	1
comparison will be made between Dr. Robertson and Mr. 	1
compass. 	1
compass with the old ; that this change, he said, would re- 	1
compelled to serve, but of such as voluntarily followed 	1
competitors. She might marry a foreign and a popish 	1
complained. 	1
complaints of the poverty and dependence of the 	1
complaisance of a man who had vindicated her autho- 	1
compliance, for no steps were taken towards it. 	1
compliance, in this manner, with the measures of the 	1
complices; pictures appeared to the same purpose; 	1
comply with the queen's request. Records Priv. Counc. manuscript in the 	1
composed the vanguard, ran so eagerly to the attack, 	1
composition, but because there is a paragraph in it which I 	1
compositions, but strongly marked by the Scotch ac- 	1
compositions of authors by profession obscure, or af- 	1
compound with the Almighty for their sins, by bestowing 	1
comprehend domestic occurrences and revolutions ; but, 	1
compressed into a smaller space, and the new barbarians, who 	1
concealed his distrust of the nobles, and suffered no 	1
conceal or to disguise their own vices. According to 	1
conceal rather than to detect his guilt. Lennox fore- 	1
conceal, until it be known whether that approbation 	1
conceived to be destructive to the peace and liberty of 	1
concern. But, at first, he retired for safety into the 	1
concern for the safety of the prince and the honour of 	1
concerning considerably increased, many more were still wanted, 	1
concerning religion with the advice of parliament. In this act the inten- 	1
concerning the Knowledge which the Ancients had of 	1
concerning the manner in which the crime was to be committed. If the 	1
concerning the origin and power of the committee of lords of articles, occur, 	1
concerning the settlement of the nation, and the future 	1
concerns of the Spaniards, would not be likely to ex- 	1
concerted in France, committed the administration ofanI s P inthe 	1
Concessions, however, seldom satisfy the populace. 	1
concessions of this kind should seem precarious, and 	1
conciled to him, if he abstained from accusing her of 	1
conciling the contending factions; and the earl of 	1
concluded. 	1
concluded. ^^ ^ ^^ j itt | e vig()ur on e ^ er g^e. The his- 	1
concluded that these ships belonged to him, and gave 	1
concluded without obtaining her consent, the duty and 	1
conclude peace, without the concurrence of parliament ; 	1
conclude that Mr. George Wishart, known by the name of the martyr, was 	1
conclude, that they were not conducted with prudence. 	1
concurred in determining the protestant leaders to fall 	1
concurred to introduce this corruption of morals among 	1
concurred with the other counsellors in this decision a ; 	1
concurrence in the conspiracy against queen Elizabeth, was 	1
concurring causes might, almost imperceptibly, kindle 	1
condemn, and impossible to punish him. Besides a 	1
condemnation of the murder of Rizio, and exults over the supposed death of 	1
condemned and executed. But no discovery of import- 	1
condemning declaration of Elizabeth's sentiments. Cecil acquainted 	1
condemn the furious zeal of the reformers, and to 	1
cond French envoy brought to Mary, conjuring her, at 	1
condition of Europe, in those ages, allow its princes to 	1
condition on which she again received Murray into 	1
conditions to a conquered people, and it is no Vender 	1
cond son, engrossed the entire direction of the French 	1
conduct. 	1
conduct, and charged him to lay aside all thoughts 	1
conduct, and from their own, to expect the severest 	1
conduct; and upon no representation of theirs would 	1
conduct at greater length, and to enter into a more mi- 	1
conduct confirmed and strengthened these suspicions. 	1
conduct. eating his conduct, in presence of her commissioners. 	1
conducted, as well as the amount of the evidence now 	1
conducted it with more skill ; and, by dexterously avail- 	1
conducted the queen to the castle of Borthwick ; and 1567. 	1
conducted with perfect unanimity. The grant of the 	1
conduct ex- .,, T i PI-T T 	1
conduct. He assured him, that he had employed all 	1
conduct her to Dunbarton castle, a place of great 	1
conduct of parties, for which this period is so remark- 	1
conduct, particularly in the early part of his life. The world 	1
conduct she observed towards James the sixth, whom 	1
conduct. That cabal of his enemies, which occasioned 	1
conduct to the courts of France and England. The 	1
conduct under the great seal, he ventured to meet him 	1
conduct was without courage, or dignity, or consist- 	1
conduct ; which, without admitting this circumstance, 	1
conduct with warmth, but with great strength of rea- 	1
confede- 	1
confederacy at Bayonne. Keith, Append. 167. 4. She allowed mass to 	1
confederacy of the two kingdoms had already been 	1
confederacy with Bothwell ; and thus, to the disgrace 	1
confederated in septs or clans, committed these excesses 	1
confederates appeared not only wise, but just. The 	1
confederates b . 	1
confederates conducted her towards Edinburgh ; and, 	1
confederates had, in her opinion, encroached on the 	1
confederating with England, protection was provided 	1
conference, and despairing of ever obtaining any suc- 	1
conference at York, and how, by the strength of their 	1
conference from York to Westminster suspended, but 	1
conferences appointed to be held at York c . 	1
conferred upon James: but, during so busy a period, 	1
confessions of the persons executed for the king's mur- 	1
confide, and bent to promote her designs. The ruin 	1
confide. Both the queen of Scots and the regent were 	1
confide in nobles, to whom he had given so many causes 	1
confidence and of veneration. Men willingly submitted 	1
confidence, did not humour him in these follies. By 	1
confidence of success inspires ; and if the conduct of 	1
confidence, seconded their solicitations. And Murray, 	1
confirmed, and was become altogether incurable. A 	1
confirmed : the earl of Huntly, and several of his vas- 	1
Confirms 	1
conformable to the ancient laws and customs of the 	1
confronted with her ; a manner of proceeding, which, though 	1
confusion of that factious period, he dispensed justice 	1
congregation 11 ; and they, with open arms, received a 	1
congregation, by their courage and perseverance, con- 	1
congregation, in order to prove their conduct to have 	1
congregation sunk altogether. They did not think 	1
congregation the necessity of agreeing to this article, 	1
congregation, was considered, from that time, as the 	1
conjecture, that you had some thoughts of taking up the sub- 	1
conjunction of the British queens. For this purpose 	1
conjuncture. All the demands of the protestants were 	1
conjuncture. But the current of popular favour ran so 	1
connexion with the success of his religion, considered ; a sermon, preached 	1
connived at his encroachments in the north; and, by 	1
consciousness of guilt deprived Bothwell of his wonted 	1
consciousness of the insult which he had offered to so 	1
Conscious of guilt, and afraid of discovery, they de- 	1
consented, through their influence, to tolerate and pro- 	1
consented to all these proposals, except the second, 	1
consenting to his elevation to the throne, he would give 	1
consent of parliament was obtained, before he ventured 	1
consent of parliament x ; a condition which implied al- 	1
consent to a league, offensive and defensive, between 	1
consent to her own bondage, and to invest those persons 	1
consent to that measure. While these were her senti- 	1
consequence : or, perhaps, necessity might have ob- 	1
consequences might follow a breach with England, lis-. 	1
consequences of retreating. 	1
consequence, the perpetual tool of those who found 	1
consequence, the proceedings of that assembly were 	1
consequence, to give attendance in parliament. To the 	1
consequence, was expected with the utmost anxiety. 	1
considerable body there. It appears from the ancient 	1
considerable influence on the councils of a nation, hi- 	1
considerable interest even with their enemies, who could 	1
considerable step towards that end. The motive which 	1
considerably contracted, and that Lennox had only 	1
consider as appropriated to their order, were now be- 	1
consideration ; it was made to him in a letter from lord 	1
consideration of an English monarch, wisdom and ma- 	1
considerations, a retreat would be attended with all the 	1
considerations of interest, it was on this occasion. Mary, 	1
considerations of interest, they beheld these early symp- iseo. 	1
considerations of prudence or policy. Eager and i 	1
consideration the state of religion, and to signify their 	1
considered as the rewards of their valour, might be sub- 	1
considering every religious fabric as a relic of idolatry, 	1
consisted of two thousand horse. Those of the other 	1
consistency and dignity of his character." 	1
consistent. Such judicatories became the objects of 	1
consisting of peers and barons of the first rank, found 	1
conspiracy against Darnly. There seem, however, to be plausible reasons 	1
conspiracy against his life. 	1
conspiracy; but, by explaining to me his sentiments 	1
conspiracy existed only in the frantic and disordered 	1
conspirators from attempting it k . 	1
conspirators, the real intention of which was assassi- 	1
constable Montmorency had employed all his interest 	1
constable was a prisoner in the hands of the Spaniards ; 	1
constant pay ; that service grew to be honourable ; and 	1
Constema- At the time when the queen made her escape, the 	1
consternation. Murray had only a handful of men in 	1
constitution, the feebleness of regal authority, the ex- 	1
constitution, the president and one half of the senators 	1
construed to be treason, and a resolution was taken to 	1
consultations, and returned every man to his own 	1
consulted them with regard to the answer she should ~ 	1
consulting her ancient ally, the French king u . 	1
consulting original papers either in print or in manu- 	1
consumed a youthful and vigorous constitution. Some 	1
CONTAINING A REVIEW OF THE SCOTTISH HISTORY PRE- 	1
CONTAINING ORIGINAL PAPERS. 	1
contains a great number of valuable papers copied 	1
contains not only a large collection of original papers 	1
contains the model or platform of the intended policy d . 	1
contemned by one half of the nation, and little trusted 	1
contemporary historians mention with indignation. 	1
Contemporary historians often select with little judg- 	1
contempt, and who envied their power and wealth. By 	1
contempt for her authority, the protestants had violated them - 	1
contended in order to establish them. But the refor- 	1
contents, constrained them, though with reluctance, to 	1
content was much heightened by the king's recalling 	1
contest the king had, though with a single baron, soon 	1
continual accessions of wealth and of dignity ; a great 	1
continual expectations of the latter, and had, thereby, 	1
continual migrations of its inhabitants, and the frequent 	1
continuance. Many good qualities, added to great love 	1
continuance of a truce, and ungenerously detained a 	1
continued to educate and support them until they were 	1
continued with her till the time of her return into Scot- 	1
continued with little intermission upwards of seventy 	1
continue long in this state. Cities gradually acquired 	1
continue obedient to their general, they bound them- 	1
continuing the negotiation, he renewed it with greater 	1
contracting parties bound themselves mutually to assist 	1
contrary to her own judgment, and to all the rules of 	1
contrary to her proclamation'. Mary, however, was 1563. 	1
contributed to the rejection of a remonstrance against 	1
contributed, without doubt, towards establishing him 	1
contribute to retard or defeat the schemes formed 	1
contrivance and execution of it. Bothwell, it was pre- 	1
contrivance, but to the commission of that odious crime e . 	1
control, and to level all distinctions in the church, the 	1
controversies, the ambassadors declared that they would 	1
controversy was agitated with all the heat which na- 	1
controversy was still unabated. The memory of past 	1
convention might have been attended with consequences 	1
convention of peers, temporal and spiritual, there ap- 	1
convention, wherein all the differences between the 	1
conversation and public speaking, frequently gives the 	1
convert, whose abilities added both strength and repu- 	1
conveys an idea of her abilities, address, and spirit, as 	1
conviction, that the conduct of their mistress could not 	1
convinced himself of the queen's sincerity, served her 	1
copy by the stagecoach, or some other conveyance. I beg of 	1
copy is but just put into my hands : David Hume so far in- 	1
copy to Elliot during the holidays, who thinks it one of the 	1
cording to the fate of favourites, was sudden and de- 	1
coronation of the young king. By another, she ap-j u iy24. 	1
correct such inveterate evils. Neither the men nor the 	1
correspondence in England with those who favoured 	1
CORRESPONDENCE. Iv 	1
CORRESPONDENCE. li 	1
CORRESPONDENCE. liii 	1
correspondence seems to have been nearly decided 	1
correspondence with the privy counsellors of another, 	1
correspondence with the queen of Scots p . During the 	1
CORRESPONDENCE. xli 	1
CORRESPONDENCE. xliii 	1
CORRESPONDENCE. xlix 	1
CORRESPONDENCE. xlv 	1
CORRESPONDENCE. xlvii 	1
CORRESPONDENCE. xxxiii 	1
CORRESPONDENCE. xxxix 	1
CORRESPONDENCE. xxxv 	1
CORRESPONDENCE. xxxvii 	1
could any facts be withdrawn from the darkness which 	1
could bear. I recollected with reverence, that the di- 	1
could be forced open, Hamilton had mounted a fleet 	1
could be founded on her offer. She expected that 	1
could be no longer concealed. He was often absent 	1
could be regularly elected so long before the meeting of parliament, it is 	1
could demand, either for the safety of their own per- 	1
could derive their only reasonable hope of success. 	1
could either forget the violence which themselves had 	1
could employ the magnanimity and boldness of his 	1
could exempt from punishment those who should be 	1
could forfeit the esteem and affection of her subjects ; 	1
could form none of those dangerous schemes to which 	1
could hardly be kept from sinking to the ground. The 	1
could have been done without the declared interfer- 	1
could have taken. The pretences on which she de- 	1
could have wished, of their company, and must have given 	1
could have written in this strain to such a discerning minister. Keith, 287. 	1
could induce any man to perpetrate such a crime, so 	1
could inspire ; and, encouraged by the number, as well 	1
could neither oppose nor defeat. Some few were con- 	1
could not be broken ; and no change of manners, or of 	1
could not be left unanswered, without a manifest injury 	1
could not be otherwise construed than as taken with an 	1
could not endeavour at suppressing them with too 	1
could not expect that any Frenchman here would be equal to 	1
could not forbear treating him with marks of con- 	1
could not inflict, their own could easily execute. Under 	1
could not long remain a secret. It began to be 	1
could not, on any pretence, be eluded ; and it was re- 	1
could not possibly be serious ; and that in all her vio- 	1
could not reach ; the nobles, conscious of this advan- 	1
could not refuse his assistance towards restoring his 	1
could not think themselves secure, without fixing some 	1
could not vindicate his own conduct without charging 	1
could plead that it was owing to force rather than 	1
could point out to her any other English book she could un- 	1
could prepare for their defence. But he was weak 	1
could render it safe to enter on the last and decisive 	1
could restore Morton, Maitland, and their associates, 	1
could return, her fear and impatience was so great, !l on ,. a * 	1
could take to obtain vengeance. He followed the re- 	1
council, and to save his vassals from an unnecessary 	1
councils, than this last step. Whether she had any 	1
councils, that she was discouraged from espousing their 	1
councils. The Scottish monarchs did not derive more 	1
councils, was far from any thoughts of vindicating the 	1
council which gave directions with regard to the time 	1
counsellors of England. She expressed in it a grateful 	1
counsels which she had been obliged to follow; and, 	1
count, but 	1
count. Elizabeth, a daughter of that marriage, was the wife of Matthew, 	1
countess of Lennox, though born of a second marriage, 	1
count for the ascendant which our kings acquired in 	1
counties, it was owing to no want of the same disposi- 	1
counties were great, and they possessed that influence 	1
counties were summoned to attend their sovereign, in 	1
counting that cause just and honourable which their 	1
count of their holding a secret correspondence with the 	1
count of the king's murder, the subscribers promised 	1
count. * power and independence of the Scottish nobility. Level 	1
countries, is easily worked upon by the incitements of 	1
country, and gave way to rivals with whom he was un- 	1
country, at the sight of real war ; and, as they could 	1
country, exposes France to no danger ; but one unsuc- 	1
country full of his dependents. In this situation, six- 	1
country in a species of writing, in which, of all others, it has 	1
country. In order to hasten this latter event, they did 	1
countrymen. 	1
countrymen, and more willing to accompany their chief- 	1
countrymen hath ascribed many fabulous acts of prow- 	1
countrymen on the other, two different processes be- 1567. 	1
countrymen to second him. 	1
country, the king and queen should not declare war or 	1
country, where he arrived a few days before the trial 	1
country, with instructions to observe the motions both 	1
counts of his actions. By some she was told, that the 	1
courage, and repulsed with considerable loss. From 	1
couraged by this success in the beginning of his enter- 	1
courage his enemies on the continent to invade his king- 	1
couragement to these principles. For these reasons, 	1
courage, or the queen, by her authority, forbade the 	1
cour from her, she endeavoured to rouse her own ad- 	1
course ; as, by keeping Scotland in confusion, she ef- 	1
course of things, be far distant, and many incidents 	1
course to those arts which she had often employed to 	1
cours, was in no disposition for listening to demands 	1
court, and declared for the party at enmity with the car- 	1
court, and even punish his vassal, if he submitted to a 	1
court, and received him with many demonstrations of 	1
court at Stirling, and threatened to elect another re- 	1
court b ; which, at a time when no man of rank left his 	1
courted by many to whom he could not with propriety 	1
courted the friendship of the king of Scots, and endea- 	1
courted ; while the young earl of Douglas, encouraged 	1
court, in order to undermine the power and credit of 	1
court must have been, in a great measure, under their 	1
court of commissaries for a divorce, on account of his 	1
court of France since the death of Henry, or careless 	1
court, one of the politest but most corrupted in Europe, 	1
courts had been abolished by the parliament in the 	1
court should instantly proceed to trial. One of Len- 1567. 	1
Courts the The favourers of the reformation being the most nu- 	1
courts to a measure which she had so much at heart, ^ofthe 6 " 	1
courts were rare ; when armies were composed of sol- 	1
court. t &gt;^; . 	1
court, with many ceremonious expressions of regard for 	1
covered all the subtilty and penetration of Ferdinand 	1
covered; and, though it saved him from the infamous I5t&gt;7. 	1
covered during the subsequent revolutions leaves little 	1
covered his intention to recover those possessions of 	1
covered, in all his behaviour, that assuming insolence, 	1
covered itself at first in murmurs and complaints, but, 	1
covered the impotence of her own authority, without 	1
covered with dust, and bedewed with tears, was ex- 	1
coveries, and to hide her shame ; nor was it possible 	1
coveries, to correct your opinion with regard to facts which 	1
covering the least intention to marry. A violent dis- 	1
covering the paths which lead most directly to success, 	1
cover. It was easy for Maitland, whose sentiments 	1
cover, not only that many of the steps she had taken 	1
cover the most dutiful attachment to the queen, the 	1
cover the reasonableness and propriety of customs which 	1
covery it makes of the sentiments and spirit which then 	1
covery of his own weakness and want of authority. 	1
cowardice, but all in vain. A few of Bothwell's imme- 	1
cracy, it could not be of long continuance; and this 	1
craft, of which even that credulous age believed her 	1
Craig, de Feud. lib. i. Dieg. 14. Du Cange, Gloss, voc. dominicum. 	1
Crawfurd, who was historiographer to queen Anne. 	1
created earl of Bothwell, the same person who had so 	1
create many obstacles, which would retard or render 	1
creatures, by soothing his vanity, led him astray, while 	1
credulity." 	1
cretion of a priest, who, immediately after Knox's ser- 	1
cretly and at once, to cut off Mar, Morton, and Mait- 	1
cret pleasure, the difficult and perplexing scene on 	1
cret, were little disposed to assume the dangerous cha- 	1
Crichton, the most able man of those who had the James the 	1
Crichton, too high-spirited to bear such an insult, but 	1
crifice her own ambition, in order to remove the jea- 	1
crime *. 	1
crime ; but they were persons of low rank, and seem 	1
crime ." Next year a second proclamation to the same 	1
crime of imbruing their hands in the blood of their 	1
crimes, raise strong suspicions of the former, and put 	1
crime suffered not only to appear publicly in every 	1
crimes whatsoever 6 ." To seize the person of the prince 	1
criminal and servile. Knox solemnly renounced the 	1
criminal. His enterprising ambition had already formed 	1
criminal intercourse. Bothwell's addresses, which struck her protestant sub- 	1
criminal love for Rizio, 340. 344. Knox slightly insinuates that such a 	1
criminals. Wherever she turned her eyes, they held 	1
criminal thoughts. He concluded a treaty with Ed- 	1
croached upon ; they suffered the most irregular acts 	1
croaching and sanguinary spirit of popery in that age, 	1
croachments. No wonder haughty and martial barons 	1
croachments on the jurisdictions of the nobles were po- 	1
croachment upon his domains he concluded that his 	1
crowded into her thoughts, and made her sensibly feel 	1
crowded to Stirling, and his court was soon filled with 	1
crown. A feudal kingdom was split into many small 	1
crown among those whose enmity they dreaded, or whose 	1
crown ; and the dread of this had hitherto restrained 	1
crown could, with any colour of justice, be set in op- 1566. 	1
crown. He saw, from the fatal end of James the third, 	1
crown in the hands of the avowed enemies of the king- 	1
crown matrimonial, acquired a right to assume the title of king, to have his 	1
crown matrimonial, a phrase peculiar to the Scottish 	1
crown matrimonial subsisted only during the continuance of the marriage. 	1
crown, obtained a sentence, declaring the pardon to be 	1
crown of Scotland would probably have been the re- 	1
crown received scarcely any salary besides the fees and 	1
crowns, and possessed of lands in both kingdoms, could 	1
crown. The external forms of subordination, natural 	1
crown to her own posterity. The marriage with the 	1
crown, were entirely at the king's devotion, and it was 	1
crown. With this view, they had laboured to exclude the 	1
cruel necessity of putting herself into the hands of 	1
cruelty, they still allowed her the praise of prudence 	1
cularly by writing a letter to the Critical Review, which you 	1
cular task for which my appointments are to be given." 	1
cular, the letters and other papers said to be written 	1
culiar to the inhabitants of southern climates, rendered 	1
cult for a man to speak of himself with any decency through 	1
cultivated with David ' Rizio, contributed to increase 	1
culty, as the king violently opposed it. He was obliged, 	1
culty that they tolerated the arrogance, of this un- 	1
cumstances entitled her to respect and to compassion, 	1
cumstances more decisive, with regard to the origin of 	1
cumstances, to sacrifice a part of their possessions, in 	1
cumstances, which afterwards appeared to be false : among others, that a 	1
cumstance was settled, the bishop of Ross, in the 	1
cunning, as the earl of Morton, ever engaged in a 	1
Cunningham's objections were overruled; and the jury, 	1
curacies of former historians, to avoid their mistakes, 	1
cure asylum ; and not a few, out of choice or necessity, 	1
cured their own independence. 	1
cured to an author by literary eminence, we must own 	1
cure her that sympathy which is seldom denied to un- 	1
cure in Scotland the assistance of some troops, which 	1
cure of souls. Two years afterwards he was enabled 	1
cure of their assistance, openly approved of the decrees 	1
curing to the protestant clergy more regular payment of their stipends ; and 	1
curiosity had drawn together, to behold such an un- 	1
curious. 	1
curious portion of human manners, is at length rescued 	1
curity to themselves, 355. 	1
curred their displeasure those rival families which wish- 	1
curred with the queen in promoting a marriage which 	1
currence of a good power of her faithful subjects Therefore commands 	1
cused Mary of the same crime, and pretended to be 	1
custody, and that the government of the kingdom should 	1
custody of the queen, she relied on Murray's vigilance, 	1
customs, because they want knowledge and taste to dis- 	1
cute this matter in a friendly and obliging manner for you, 	1
cute this resolution. In a parliament held soon after, 	1
cuting his sentences. When assembled on these occa- 	1
cuting spirit of the Romish superstition, and the fierce- 	1
cution excite wonder. The cardinal, at that time, re- 	1
cution of her pernicious designs. They proceeded 	1
cution of these things, the said Wishart saith, that the earl marshal afore- 	1
cution of the vast designs he had conceived. 	1
d2 	1
dable a body, which was drawn up by its leaders in such 	1
dable motion put off for that session. Happily for her, 	1
dable on a day of battle by the ardour of their courage, 	1
daily encouraged them ; or till scarcity of provisions 	1
dained that, for the future, no obedience should be 1569. 	1
Damly Darnly's external accomplishments had excited that 	1
dan consented, in the name of Francis and Mary, that 	1
d Anders. Diplom. Scot. Nos. 68 and 164. 	1
d Anders, vol. ii. 92. Good. vol. ii. 90. 	1
d Anders, vol. iv. part i. 113. Haynes, 509. See Appendix, No. XXVI. 	1
Danes, and often subjected to the yoke of those for- 	1
danger. A just occasion of this kind was given them, 	1
danger; and instantly resolved not to abandon the men 	1
danger, as might counterbalance the influence of those 	1
danger of falling into the hands of the rebels, he laid 	1
dangerous and rapid progress of the French arms in 	1
dangerous confederacy into which he had entered ; the 	1
dangerous distemper. The symptoms which attended 	1
dangerous neighbour, but were unable to prevent his 	1
dangerous, preeminence of the Douglases seemed to 	1
dangerous, the salique laws permitted him publicly to desist from demand- 	1
dangerous ; to succeed in it was disgraceful. But the 	1
dangerous to the life of the young prince, than subver- 	1
dangerous tumults in that city. At last, the mediation 	1
danger prevailed over both the sense of honour and 	1
dangers and inconveniencies arising from it, to both 	1
danger. The popish ecclesiastics had acquired a share 	1
danger, was as much startled as the cardinal could have 	1
danger with which it was easy to foresee that the dis- ~ 	1
dared that poison was the cause of these symptoms, and that the queen 	1
daring than Bothwell's, or had recourse to bolder or 	1
dark intrigue, was despatched into Scotland, and re- 	1
darkness, or be buried in oblivion. But as so many 	1
darkness with those of other nations, a calamity pecu- obscure. 	1
Darnly, and held them for some time in an happy union, ll * tre | 1 to 	1
Darnly and his father, by their behaviour, were raising nobles, 	1
Darnly and his father, to confine the queen in Lochleven during life, and 	1
Darnly and Qn ^ ^y jjQfjj parties, dark designs of a more criminal na- 	1
Darnly could not bear the intrusion of such an upstart ; 	1
Darnly, in the twenty-first year of his age. The in- 	1
Darnly might reap from his patronage, it did not coun- 	1
Darnly, still more imprudent, allowed some rash ex- 	1
Darnly. This embassy was the first thing which open- 	1
Darnly? tO * obtain. The earl of Murray was the person in the 	1
dated by his merit. That author has no other merit but a 	1
dated the twenty-sixth of February, 1770, from the 	1
date March the twenty-eighth, which happened on a Thursday. Anders. 	1
date the hearts of assassins' 1 . Huntly's own house,'at 	1
dation with the regent was the only thing which could 	1
daughter-in-law to assume the title and arms of queen of 	1
daughter, of Margaret. This was not the only advan- 	1
daunted and erect; and, having mounted the pulpit, 	1
dauphin. But from this they were diverted by the part 	1
dauphin. on a broader and more secure foundation, by hastening 	1
David Dalrymple and Mr. Davidson, and believe me to be, etc. 	1
David, earl of Huntingdon, third son of king David the 	1
David his son, at first an exile in France, afterwards David the 	1
DAVID HUME. 	2
David the * 	1
David the first, who acquired on that account the name 	1
Davila ; Brantome. 	1
day of my death. I am at the same time free to declare, 	1
days. 	1
days ago I saw Mrs. Montague, who has just finished it with 	1
days, and at last obeyed a second call, and repaired 	1
days by twenty thousand men ; and flattered her that, 	1
days in suspense, he gained time to view with attention 	1
days in the wastes of Lidclisdale, were plundered by 	1
days. My absence will not probably allow my claret time to 	1
days of his life. Keith, Append. 120. Good. i. 227. 	1
days previous to the trial. 	1
days should not be cut short, either by a judicial sen- 	1
day they obtained the approbation of what they had done, by way of se- 	1
day to the exorbitant power and wealth which he pos- 	1
dazzled and interested the people ; the sudden conflu- 	1
dazzle the young queen, she instantly despatched Cas- 	1
d Caes. lib. vi. c. 23. e Tacit, de Mor. Germ. c. 7. 11. 	1
d d sooner. But I will endeavour to keep my temper. 	1
dead body of the late king, stretched on the ground, 	1
deal genius, and even where monarchical government was establish- 	1
deal. Such a rough courtship, as the earl of Huntly 	1
Dear doctor, 	1
DEAR ROBERTSON, Among other agreeable circumstances, 	1
Dear sir, 	2
DEAR SIR, An error in your direction (to Wimpole- 	1
DEAR SIR, I have just read over the second volume of 	1
DEAR SIR, Millar has just sent me the History of Scot- 	1
DEAR SIR, Your candid and friendly interpretation will 	1
death, and, in his absence, the influence of the queen's 	1
Death and The queen regent, the instrument, rather than the 	1
death at Lauder. As if this precaution had not been 	1
death of Alexander the third. The third extends to the 	1
death of cardinal Beatoun, fifty-four persons had held 	1
death of Hume, and eight years after the publishing of 	1
death of James, Henry the eighth was no longer afraid 	1
death of James the fifth. The last, from thence to the 	1
death to which his associates were condemned, it could ~ 	1
death was before Mary's eyes, if she refused to comply 	1
deavoured, by ratifying the treaty, to preserve the ap- 	1
deavoured, by secret negotiations and intrigues, to dis- 	1
deavoured to bring about a change in his sentiments, 	1
deavoured to conceal 1 . These pretexts are decent; 	1
deavoured to inspire his pupil with the same sentiments. 	1
deavoured to sooth the affliction of his desponding fa- 	1
debted to you. I have often considered, with some sort of 	1
Dec. 14. eminence in her kingdom ; in order that they might 	1
Dec. 15. 	1
Dec. 15. prosecute Knox for that crime, before the privy council. 	1
Dec. 17. The ceremony itself was performed according to the 	1
Dec. 20. gular classes or societies. The first general assembly 	1
Dec. 20. Towards the end of the year, a convention of estates 	1
Dec. 24. the king *. The regent and his associates asserted their 	1
Dec. 25. considerable. In the assemblies of the church, the 	1
Dec. 4. 	1
deceit. Previous to these public transactions with the 	1
deceived the world, were put on at the solicitation of the 	1
deceive her e . 	1
December. After these preliminary steps, Mary ventured to call 	1
December, they had discovered so little delicacy and 	1
decency, but with excessive cheerfulness ; and willingly 	1
decessors, in their attempts to humble them. The plan 	1
decided every contest. The passion of revenge was 	1
decisive blow, to prevent all future bloodshed and con- 	1
Dec. i. The duke of Chatelherault, on his humble applica- 	1
declaration, affirm the design of the conspirators to have been to murder 	1
declaration, than she astonished them with this reply : 	1
declared, not without reason, that Mary was the ' hid- 	1
declared openly against the alliance with England. By whdfmi- 6 	1
declare that this confidential communication was made 	1
declare to Elizabeth that, after having been amused so 	1
declaring at the same time that then* persons, estates, 	1
decline complying, at that time, with the queen's request. 	1
declined it, therefore, but with many expressions of 	1
decorate the altar for that purpose, precipitated them 	1
deed, be pleaded in excuse for the duke of Somerset's 	1
deed much authority, but possessed next to none. Our 	1
deemed an act of intolerable rigour ; and the friends of 	1
deemed their enemies. Fife was the most populous and 	1
deem it a decisive proof of his guilt, that he did not choose to risk his per- 	1
deen. His brother Adam was pardoned on account of 	1
deeper impression upon him than the benefit which 	1
deepest schemes z . Instead, therefore, of returning 	1
deep for simple. The queen's majesty knoweth of it." Hardw. State Pap. 	1
deeply than any other prince; and she observed all 	1
deeply the passions of several princes, or gave rise to 	1
deep melancholy succeeded to that gaiety of spirit 	1
dee, which were suspected of favouring the malecon- 	1
default of heirs of the body of the queen's majesty. Well, God send our 	1
Defeated. The conduct of this negotiation occasioned many 	1
defeat, should gather such strength that she could 	1
defence of it before the peers of France, and avowedly 	1
defence of the kingdom against its invaders a , and took 	1
defence of the kingdom. The earl of Hertford, a leader 	1
defended with their swords in the field. Besides a full 	1
defend his send to York deputies properly instructed for vmdi- 	1
defending the borders, the queen regent proposed, in 1555. 	1
defend the liberty of Europe. His dominions were less 	1
deference for the opinions of her countrymen, her bro- 	1
degree. His moral qualities are more dubious, and 	1
degree of doctor in divinity by diploma from the univer- 	1
degree of independence, and he had not recovered that 	1
degree of perplexity and contradiction, she warned 	1
degree, that intrepid spirit which delights in pursuing 	1
delays, spun out the negotiations for that purpose to 	1
delegated jurisdiction of a regent, or to the feeble com- 	1
Deliberate But, that they might not seem to depart from the 	1
deliberate perusal, I discover any blemish, I shall point it out 	1
deliberating concerning the course which it was most liberations 	1
deliberation ; censured by the reformed preachers, and 	1
deliberation, replied, that neither her conscience nor 	1
deliberations had been influenced by considerations of 	1
Delibera- tremities against their sovereign, that it now became 	1
delicate hand. After so many open attempts, carried 	1
deliver hostages to Elizabeth, before the march of her 	1
delivery of your very obliging letter, but that delay is not 	1
demand. Besides, as the Scottish nobles openly ac- 	1
demanded an interview with Kirkaldy, a brave and 	1
demanded. How to retreat with decency, how to elude 	1
demanded of him to renounce his alliance with France, 	1
demanded possession of the kingdom, that he might be 	1
demands in Mary's favour, turned towards that party 	1
de Martigues, with a thousand veteran foot, and some 	1
demnation, and punishment of the queen herself, as the 	1
demnation, capital punishment should be inflicted upon 	1
demned to death, as rebels against the king's govern- 	1
demned to death soon after the battle of Langside, as 	1
demolished, and the armies of France and England 	1
demonstrations of regard, the genius and sentiments of 	1
den and formidable incursions of their allies, the Scots. 	1
den as those of the other are slow. Hence proceeded 	1
den cause' of both. Many of her own subjects favoured 	1
dence 6 . The prior of St. Andrew's and Maitland of 	1
dence and anxiety natural to an author on publishing 	1
dence, and had deprived him of all power; and the 	1
dence and moderation of her character. She began The queen 	1
dence at Craigmillar 8 . Such a retirement, perhaps, sn 	1
dence in confirmation of the charge" 1 . 	1
dence in England, he had an opportunity of observing 	1
dence of her guilt. Bothwell having left in the castle 	1
dence to rescue the church from the intolerant spirit 	1
den resolution of the Scottish queen, but without rea- declares 	1
dent ; and, though she declared, in strong terms, what 	1
dent compliance with the prejudices of their sovereign, 	1
dent con- dangerous exigencies as this, the superiority of Murray's 	1
dented and audacious deed 1 ". 	1
dent of the court of session, a zealous papist, heartily 	1
dents, baffled all the efforts of their own queen, aided 	1
dents were permitted to converse with her k . The 	1
dent. Without his participation no business was con- g^^u 	1
depended on the general union, these small societies 	1
depended upon the fidelity and abilities of these offi- 	1
dependence of Scotland, which had prompted them to 	1
dependence on Elizabeth, under which he brought 	1
dependent spirit, which rendered men attentive to their 	1
dependents, who were no less brave than zealous *. 	1
depressed by the misfortunes of her administration. To 	1
deprived, and he quickly found peace to be necessary 	1
deprive him of his usurped authority. But the nu- 	1
derable sum. The ' thirds' due by the more powerful 	1
deracy and mutual defence. Two persons concurred 	1
deracy which now subsisted between the two kingdoms ; 	1
der a feeble government : persons accused of any crime 	1
der; and, after deeming the whole irrecoverably lost, 	1
der ; and the fatal casket which contained the letters, 	1
derates the queen's inclinations towards peace, and her 	1
derates who were most attentive to her interest, that a 	1
der, by confining the person who was on good grounds 	1
dered by them as the effect of artifice. 	1
dered fancy. In order to revive the king's spirits, an 	1
dered his father. . Bothwell, however, laboured to get 	1
dered it necessary to put it out of the queen's power to 	1
dered more agreeable by a courteous affability, which, 	1
dered publicly in the streets of Paris ; and so far was 	1
dered the entering into any treaty with subjects, and 	1
dered their service in the field as a full retribution for 	1
derer of her husband ; and if he were given up to jus- 	1
derer of his son had been absolved, without regard to 	1
derers. next object of the queen's care. The laws enacted for 	1
derers, was far superior to the king's, both in number 	1
der hand, seeming desirous that it should remain in 	1
derived originally from the same source, or had been 	1
deriving much benefit from your candid and friendly criticism. 	1
der of cardinal Beatoun and of Rizio, without express- 	1
der of her husband ; the bitterness of style peculiar 	1
der of succession to the crown f . Her love to her sub- 	1
der of the king. Something was still wanting for his 	1
ders instantly given for raising a numerous army. But, 	1
der some restraint. It had not yet attained firmness 	1
derson, Jebb, Forbes, and others, which I know not how to 	1
dertake, without running the risque of being anticipated by any 	1
dertaking is, and that I could not propose to execute 	1
der the prior, Maitland, and the other favourites of the 	1
der to confront them with her. But they reply, that they 	1
dertook to assign a sufficient maintenance for the pro- 	1
der to strengthen their influence over their vassals, re- 	1
derwood's manuscripts and all the common printed histories ; 	1
descendant, James the third. Besides this, the near al- 	1
deserted, or listened to with scorn. 	1
deservedly possess much credit with the opposers of 	1
deserve not to be remembered. The gross ignorance 	1
deserve our particular attention. Resentment is, for 	1
deserve the approbation of Dr. Robertson and Mr. 	1
design, and resolved to employ his utmost address in 	1
designed for Edinburgh. The lords of the congrega- 	1
design. Nothing could be more acceptable to them 	1
design of this preliminary book. The imperfect know- 	1
designs on which his ambition resolved to venture, 	1
design to seize his person, and confine him to prison 6 , 	1
design z . 	1
desired him very earnestly to stop the publication of your 	1
desired impression on the whole kingdom. But the 	1
desires me to transmit to you his thanks and compliments in 	1
desire that, if you have any remarks to communicate, they 	1
desirous, notwithstanding the regent's audacious accu- 	1
desirous of peace with that kingdom ; and delivered, by 	1
desist from any hostile attempt against Murray, and to 	1
despatch and rigour. Having previously concerted their 	1
despatched. Maitland to signify her intention to Eliza- 	1
desperate measure, she committed to the tower one 	1
despised his authority, and, regardless either of his 	1
despised his orders, insulted his person, and wrested 	1
despised. Zealous for religion, to a degree which 	1
destitute of any real foundation. 	1
destruction in that unhappy contest. The Scottish 	1
destructive incursions of the borderers. The first seems to be the report 	1
detachment of the rebels, which was sent to rescue her, 	1
detected and exposed to public ridicule; and, under 	1
detected their designs, before they were ripe for execu- 	1
determination of the point in doubt was conceived to 	1
determined Elizabeth and her ministers to yield to the 	1
determined not to let slip such a favourable opportunity 	1
determined ^ ' . . r . .. . . . 	1
determined them rather to endanger the religion which 	1
determined to employ. The earl of Argyll, the prior 	1
determined vassals ; while that which they retained in 	1
de Umfraville, earl of Angus, was the only man -who 	1
deur and authority. His revenues were scanty ; he had m narchs. 	1
deur of another on the ruins of his own. This re- 	1
devoted to their interest, the prior of St. Andrew's, with 	1
devotion. And now she was obliged to fly, in the ut- 	1
dexterity as to raise himself upon the ruins of his rival. 	1
dexterity which is necessary for carrying them on with 	1
D'HOLBACH. 	1
d'Honueur, and other entertaining books, was just now trans- 	1
dian of the liberty of Europe. Each of the rivals court- 	1
diate attendants were eager for the encounter; the 	1
diately after concluding the truce, desired an interview 	1
diately bestowed the government of that important for- 	1
dicial act; whether they would promise to pass sen- 	1
dictated all their decisions ; but, instead of this, every 	1
dictated by the despotic and sanguinary spirit of the 	1
diction; and every minister, when he receives orders, 	1
diction. But the barbarians, who overran Europe, hav- 	1
diction of kings under the feudal governments, are greatly illustrated by 	1
dictory to a passion which predominated in the charac- 	1
Did history indulge herself in these speculations, it 	1
did not break off this intrigue. Maitland and Ross 	1
did not deem it expedient to depart altogether from 	1
did not produce any considerable change in the situa- 	1
did not seem to him such as, upon reflection, were 	1
did not think the juncture proper for his reception. 	1
did of right belong to Elizabeth alone, but also to pro- 	1
did she determine to afford her protection to the lords 	1
did so much honour to the house of Douglas, and na- 	1
died on the eleventh of June, 1791, being in his se- 	1
dience due to an administration so unjust and oppres- 	1
dience of sence f the English nobles, and before the ambassa- 	1
dience was declared to be capital r . Such strangers 	1
diers, and invested Werk castle, a garrison of the Eng- 	1
diers who served without pay ; it was not necessary that 	1
different 	1
different civility of Europe and of China; the barba- 	1
different courts had, in many respects, the advantage 	1
different from each other, and as his will, in point of 	1
different genius of the men, the temper of the times, 	1
different issue of her reign ; and, whatever sudden 	1
different kingdoms and states of Europe, in consequence 	1
different or peculiar, that (as was the case in our last 	1
different parts of the kingdom ; as they advanced, the 	1
different sense on Mary's offer. She considered her- 	1
differ from them. Nations, which hold the first rank 	1
difficulties, had early endeavoured to secure a resource 	1
difficulties, into which the treaty of Edinburgh had 	1
difficulties which obstructed the proceedings at York 	1
difficulty, Melvil was sent express to the court of Eng- 	1
Digges, the compilers of the Cabbala, Anderson, Keith, 	1
dignity and splendour of a king. 	1
dignity and wealth, they might entirely deliver the na- 	1
dignity inspired him with new passions, with haughti- 	1
dignity in the kingdom, may be alleged to have inspired 	1
dignity of a queen a . Finding that Bothwell was threat- 	1
dignity, on the uncertain hopes of being able afterwards to deprive him of 	1
digression to the course of the history. 	1
digression. We now return to the course of the history. 	1
diminution it would be to her own honour to appear 	1
dimng each . . _ 	1
dinal flattered his vanity with the prospect of marrying 	1
dinal, which, with open arms, received a convert who 	1
dinary concessions in his favour, no assistance, in pro- 	1
dinary powers, together with the title of the queen's 	1
dinary success, were still far from being perfectly at 	1
d In her own time, it was urged as an aggravation of the queen's guilt, 	1
din, Kirkaldy of Grange, and Maitland the secretary, 	1
d In the manuscript collection of papers belonging to the duke of Hamil- 	1
direction 1 *. The prospect of this union alarmed Ca- 	1
direction of affairs during the minority of James the 86 ' 	1
direction of the same president, for by his law, a. d. 1327, it is provided, 	1
direction y . 	1
directly along the street ; and, the throng of the people 	1
directly to Edinburgh, entered it with the same ease. 	1
disadvantages,. contributed however to alleviate them; 	1
disadvantages. Their efforts', however, were not with- 	1
disaffection was nourished by such hopes and promises, 	1
disappeared in France. The additional vigour, which 	1
disappointed in their expectations. The king's head- 	1
disaster." Had James survived this misfortune, one of 	1
discharge of their functions, or in the enjoyment of 	1
disclaimed it with the utmost indignation. To this we 	1
disclosed all the circumstances of that unnatural crime 	1
discontented with the court, where new men and a 	1
Discord, consternation, and perplexity, reigned in the 	1
discouraged the commercial arts. The revenues, aris- 	1
discourage it by the answer which he gave. Keith, 290. 3. The precipita- 	1
discovered it ; nor would Maitland have laboured to conceal it from the 	1
discovered, no force can well withstand them. Standing at defence they 	1
discovered no intention to push the war with vigour, 	1
discovered, on this occasion, evident symptoms, not only 	1
discovered the weakness of a woman. To this Leicester 	1
discovered those sentiments to which she adhered 	1
discover in the present situation. Hatred to England, 	1
discover : Mr. Stewart conjectures, that it was in con- 	1
discovers the capriciousness of James's character, and 	1
discovery of his sentiments, or take any step towards 	1
discovery of the contempt, the artifice, and mockery, 	1
discussion and debate, for conducting the business of 	1
discussion of the weighty matter of Scotland,' and do 	1
disease *. 	1
disease, and to have effected his cure. He received from the archbishop a 	1
disease was esteemed so contagious, that persons infected with it were re- 	1
disease was the French pox. Keith, 364. Note (b). In that age, this 	1
disguised, were, in all probability, the real motives 	1
disgust at the vices of ecclesiastics was soon transferred 	1
dishonourable as ought to have rendered them unwor- 	1
disingenuous promises, they had been rashly induced to 	1
dismissed without obtaining the ratification of the par- 	1
dismiss. Intelligence of these preparations and me- 	1
dispensation, and the prospect of gaining the consent of 	1
dispersed his followers, wounded him, and carried off 	1
dispersion of their followers, durst not encounter the 	1
display his own valour and activity in the discharge of 	1
displays her own character, and the wretched condition 	1
disposal of the queen's person. Elizabeth, observing 	1
disposed, and not without reason, to be suspicious of 	1
disposition which appeared towards settling the right 	1
dispute, with a precipitancy, violence, and rigour, which 	1
disreputation, for which, however, the success of his ally 	1
Dissert, epistolar. apud Thesaur. Ling, septentr. vol. i. p. 21. 	1
Dissimuia- negotiations concerning the marriage of the Scottish 	1
dissimulation and refinement^ Fond, towards the end 	1
distance, and bestowed every mark of confidence and 	1
distance from court, and for refusing to contribute to- 	1
distance from the borders y . 	1
distant admiration. They now begin to banter me, and tell 	1
distant and haughty. This behaviour offended some 	1
distant or imaginary hopes. The business of the nun- 	1
distant; the adjacent country was full of the friends 	1
distempered fancy might rear the whole superstructure 	1
distinction between the greater and lesser barons in Scotland ; at least 	1
distinguished by her favour, and intrusted with the 	1
distinguished by the name of a ' benevolence,' in order 	1
distinguished by the names of patriarchs, archbishops, 	1
distinguished him, even at a time when professions of 	1
distressing an invading enemy, by burning and laying 	1
distress; she neither wished that it should be in the 	1
distribution of a few favours, and the liberal promise of 	1
distrusting all the methods which had hitherto been 	1
disturbed him. But while he was fondly indulging in 	1
ditional security it had acquired by the late act of April the nineteenth, 	1
dition of a subject, and aimed at nothing less than the 	1
ditions concerning recent occurrences were fresh and 	1
ditions of a feudal tenure. In order to establish his 	1
ditions which Henry had imposed. Upon the death 	1
dit with the party, it must be regarded merely as an 	1
diversion which they occasioned enabled him to wrest 	1
diverted the king from regarding these solicitations. 	1
divert him from a journey, which must have been so 	1
divert Mary from any thoughts of a foreign alliance. 	1
divert me from this resolution ; he rises every day in dig- 	1
divided between them the strength and affections of all 	1
divided. During the short period of his son's pros- 	1
divided kingdoms in one mighty monarchy, and esta- 	1
divided ; or, if a single regent was chosen, the greater 	1
divided some of the principal nobles. Murray and 	1
divine and unalienable, and that ought not to be vio- 	1
divine displeasure against the unjust detainers of what 	1
divisions of the empire ; and the ecclesiastic of chief 	1
divorce e . 	1
divorce was unjust, and that the regent, being born while Elizabeth Home 	1
dix, that this parliament had some appearance of ancient precedent to 	1
d Knox, 389. Keith, 320. f Knox, 389. 	1
dle size; and his form, though it did not convey the 	1
doctors had little opportunity to display their address 	1
doctrine, concerning the right of subjects to resist those 	1
doctrine of the reformers in the Franciscan church at 	1
dolence, or to any other venial cause, the guilt of neglecting 	1
dolph agrees with this. Randolph says, that they intended to carry the 	1
dolph c , an agent extremely proper for conducting any 	1
dom. 	1
dom, and, in order to avert it, had recourse to the ex- 	1
dom, and next heir to the crown, or of the promises of 	1
dom, and the most proper place for the security of her 	1
dom a rival who outshone herself so far in beauty and 	1
dom, at which the French openly aimed. The French, 	1
dom. Balfour, the deputy-governor, surrendered the 	1
dom by Melvil's report. 	1
dom consenting to its own servitude, descending into the 	1
dom dispersed, and retired to their own' habitations. 	1
dom during that which immediately preceded it, is the 	1
dom embroiled, or a rival, whom she hated, reduced to 1567 - 	1
domestic, and in which the English were little interested, few original pa- 	1
domestic contests. In the sequel of the history, we 	1
domestic privacy, unheeded by the public eye, which 	1
domestic quarrels, those who could draw to their side 	1
domestics, one by one, and turning them out of the 	1
dom h ; and an act of parliament, recognising the rights 	1
dom, he carried some of them into England, and com- 	1
dom, he gave her assurance of being joined in a few 	1
dom. He knew that both the pope and the emperor 	1
dom, he resolved that neither faction should get it into ~~ 	1
dom, he was attended by a band of hired soldiers, who 	1
dom . Ill-founded, however, as their right was, the 	1
dominion of the Scots and Picts. The former, who are 	1
dominions, and to disturb her possession of the crown. 	1
dominions. Cardinal Laurea, at that time bishop of 	1
dominions flattered the ambition of a young and as- 	1
dominions, his domestic tranquillity, his immense wealth. 	1
dom. Lest she should have an opportunity of escap- 	1
dom. Melvil, who, at that time, possessed the queen's 	1
dom, she had already come to a resolution, with regard 	1
doms of Europe. But the fierce spirit of the north, 	1
doms, we may observe such unions as we have de- 	1
dom. The ambition of the English minister betrayed 	1
dom the true church of God *. Even this sum was paid 	1
dom, to dissolve associations which are founded upon 	1
dom wait the slow decisions of justice, their quarrels 	1
dom, was a dreadful prospect. In order to avoid it, 	1
dom, was appointed to be taken. The present incum- 	1
dom where the interest of his family was greatest, he 	1
doned Stirling, and, repairing to Perth, added to the 	1
done, except that on the Natural History of Religion, by 	1
done, he signified his own resolution not to be present 	1
done some good, with respect to restoring the old religion." Keith, 331. 	1
done without the queen's own consent 2 . If we may rely 	1
don next spring, I must acknowledge that it is of the most 	1
don's flight and rebellion, and refusing, in the first ~~ 	1
dont vous m'avez honore. Je le lis malgre les fluxions 	1
dor; but, after such a violent rupture, it was found no 	1
dor, she employed him, as the most proper person, to 	1
dor, to be present at the nuptial ceremony or enter- 	1
dotes of the Italian literature ? These questions I heard pro- 	1
doubled the ardour of both ; and, in a moment, the rout 	1
doubtless, be deemed a sufficient reason for adding 	1
Douglas was henceforth to possess the throne of Scot- 	1
dowager 	1
dowager had only one of two ways to choose ; either 	1
dowager, the reiterated solicitations of the French king, 	1
dowager, which it groaned at that time, died during the heat of 	1
dowed with so great a portion of the ' vis inertiae.' But as I 	1
do we find an instance of any opposition formed against 	1
down his arms. 	1
drals, churches, libraries, records, and even the sepul- 	1
draw a veil over their designs upon Scotland, began 	1
drawn by a masterly hand. But, under all the arti- 	1
drawn from the queen regent ; and, having joined the 	1
drawn up his troops on a gentle eminence, and had now 	1
Dr. Blair tells me, that prince Edward is reading you, and 	1
dreaded, and animated with the hopes of reestablishing 	1
dreaded its success ; listened to by another, who was 	1
dreaded the effects of Murray's zeal. And he, though 	1
dreaded the interposition of the French king in its 	1
dread their power, which he considered as the security 	1
dreams of the return of his former happiness, he stood 	1
dred and fifty, we cannot with any certainty determine. 	1
dred and sixty-four, of whom two hundred and two are 	1
dred and sixty, in favour of the reformation. Even 	1
dred fell in the field. In the flight almost none were 	1
dress and delicacy in managing the fears, and follies, 	1
dress, and in the number of his attendants. He dis- 	1
dress, and more by her promises. On some she be- 	1
dressed himself to Norfolk; and, after some apology 	1
dress of the court of Rome, cooperating with the power 	1
dress of their grievances, as a matter of favour. What- 	1
drew consequences after it, of the utmost importance, 	1
drew's, and in case they can so apprehend him will deliver him'unto your 	1
drew secretly from Leith, and fled to the lords of the 	1
drew the admiration of rude ages, which knew little. 	1
drew their swords, ( By these,' said they, ' we acquired , 	1
drew up a remonstrance against the intended match, 	1
drew upon him the arms of a whole confederacy. 	1
Dr. Gillies, for whose acquaintance I esteem myself much in- 	1
drink out the remainder of it with you in mirth and jollity. 	1
drink with a person who has killed any member of the ' sodalitium,' unless 	1
driven out of Scotland, under the regency of the duke l \ 	1
driven out of the kingdom, and obliged to depend for 	1
Dr^ JR., Elliott 	1
droll stories of me, which they have either observed them- 	1
drop all connexion with the church of which I am a 	1
dropped their intended application to parliament ; and 	1
drop s . 	1
drop the inquiry, and had thought of several different 	1
DR. ROBERTSON. iii 	1
DR. ROBERTSON. ix 	1
Dr. Robertson now began to attend seriously to the 	1
DR. ROBERTSON'S CORRESPONDENCE. 	1
Dr. Robertson's pen were only employed in delineating 	1
DR. ROBERTSON TO LORD HAILES. 	5
DR. ROBERTSON TO LORD HAILKS. 	1
DR. ROBERTSON. vii 	1
DR. ROBERTSON. xi 	1
DR. ROBERTSON. xiii 	1
DR, ROBERTSON. xix 	1
DR. ROBERTSON. xv 	1
DR. ROBERTSON. xvii 	1
DR. ROBERTSON. xxi 	1
DR. ROBERTSON. xxiii 	1
DR. ROBERTSON. xxix 	1
DR. ROBERTSON. xxv 	1
DR. ROBERTSON. y 	1
d See Append. No. VIII. 	1
d Spotswood, 231. In a privy council, held July 30, 1569, this demand 	1
d The act of privy council, appointing the day of Bothwell's trial, bears 	1
d The marriage articles, subscribed with his own hand, in which he calls 	1
d The standard of money in Scotland was continually varying. In the 	1
dually, and at last she might yield to the wishes of her 	1
duals ; were obtained by decisions of law ; and, being 	1
duced almost to nothing ; and the aristocratic al power 	1
duced ; and it is no wonder contemporary historians 	1
duced any considerable effect. Her proclamation was 	1
duced into almost every part of Europe, was unknown 	1
duced. The high literary eminence of the writers, and 	1
duct an enterprise which, at first, promised a very dif- 	1
duct both before and after this time, with a view of gaining the protestants, 	1
duct by those rules, which can be applied only where 	1
duct. deprivation, religious grievances are slightly mentioned ; 	1
duct during her voyage. This request, which decency Elizabeth 	1
duct, during his regency, were offered him. On the 	1
ducted by 	1
duct had been extremely incautious, and the presump- 	1
ducting it, they were glad to lay that burthen upon a 	1
ducting the negotiations for a general peace. He pre- 	1
duct. My subjects are not my equals ; nor will I, by 	1
duct, or from the character given of them by sir Ralph 	1
duct, she hoped to alarm that party in Scotland, which 	1
due, sunk altogether. In the utmost consternation, she 	1
due to a legitimate child, celebrated the marriage of 	1
due to the person who administered justice. 	1
Dugalcl Stewart, who, from his intimate connexion with 	1
duity he confirmed and fortified these dispositions of 	1
duke gave hostages for his faithful performance of the 	1
duke of Albany, and then by Murdo, the son of Robert. 	1
duke of Guise and the cardinal could never forgive the 	1
duke of Guise. The violence and ambition of that no- 	1
duke of Norfolk, the earl of Sussex, and sir Ralph 	1
duke of Rothesay, the king's eldest son, a youth of fif- 	1
duke; put his letters into her hands, and furnished 	1
duke's sons, or, at least, to commit the chief direction 	1
dulged my impatience, as to allow me to carry to the country, 	1
dulgence of fortune, and his own external accomplish- 	1
dulgence, to be incredibly strong. Mankind became 	1
dulity on Elizabeth's professions of regard, and ex- j^jgj t " 	1
Dunbar. She expressed neither surprise, nor terrour, 	1
dupe to those who found it necessary, and could sub- 	1
during his minority, with the name and authority of re- 	1
During his reign, the ancient and hereditary enmity 	1
during his residence in that city, had studied and ad- 	1
during his whole reign, she held in perpetual fear and 	1
During one of those truces between the two nations, 	1
During Robertson's stay at the university, he ap- 	1
during several ages, carried on between them and the 	1
During the absence of the prior of St. Andrew's, the The papists 	1
During the engagement, Mary stood on a hill, at no Her flight. 	1
during the first thirty years after the reformation, than during the whole 	1
during the holidays, the loose sheets which he happened to 	1
during the last years of his residence in the university, 	1
during the life of Elizabeth, or the lives of her lawful 	1
during the meeting of the convention at Perth. Mur- 	1
During the minority of James the second, the ad- 	1
during the minority of James the third. Lord Boyd, 	1
during the public commotions, they were scattered, 	1
DURING THE REIGNS 	1
During the remainder of his reign, this prince pursued 	1
During the siege, the conspirators had received from 	1
During the sitting of the convocation, the protestants 15&lt;59 - 	1
During the state of anarchy occasioned by the im- 	1
during the summer months, has occasioned some delay 	1
during the three last reigns, to produce the rights by 	1
During this last insurrection, the great body of the 	1
During this negotiation, Elizabeth's professions of 	1
During this parley, Bothwell took his last farewell Bothwell 	1
during this period ran high in the church of Scotland, 	1
During this year, the assembly of the church met June 2. 	1
durst not appear in opposition to a man, who came to 	1
durst not, or would not, venture on such an unprece- 	1
duties of his sacred profession; he is represented as 	1
dutiful and obsequious to the crown, but our monarchs 	1
duty and affection to their sovereign, and studied by 	1
duty. His father and mother dying soon after his pre- 	1
duty if they did not make to me a long and elaborate ha- 	1
duty to their country before their affection to him, re- 	1
dwindled away, and their spirits sunk. Despair and 	1
e2 	1
E2 	1
each ' estate,' who should meet twenty days before the commencement of 	1
Each of our But besides these methods of defending their prero- 	1
Each of these statutes undermined .some of the great 	1
each other, in all causes, and against all persons. By 	1
each party began to convene their vassals and depend- 	1
eagerness for peace. A treaty was accordingly con- 	1
e Anders, vol. i. 50. 52. ' Idem, vol. i. 52. 	1
ear, and, together with a few gentlemen of inferior rank, 	1
e A remarkable proof of the dissolute manners of the clergy is found in 	1
earl, and a knight of the garter, and an ambassador, and a 	1
earl been previously determined to rise in arms against the queen, or to 	1
earldom of Angus, apply to Elizabeth for her license 1564. 	1
earldom of Murray to the prior of St. Andrew's was 	1
earlier period than now, is sufficiently proved by the 	1
earl obstinately refused ; ' If you will not,' said the en- 	1
earl of Argyll, and other chiefs of the congregation. 	1
Earl of Ar- part of his countrymen. He quickly communicated 	1
Earl of Ar- proximity of blood gave him a natural title. The nobles, 	1
earl of Arran could not be attended with any such ex- 	1
earl of Arran. This young nobleman, having resided 	1
earl of .Bothwell," says he in a letter, Nov. 28, 1560, " is departed to return 	1
earl of Douglas, entered into a league of this kind with 	1
earl of Douglas, was no less powerful, and no less for- 	1
earl of Hartford, who had promised to marry one of 	1
earl of Hertford, a Scottishman called Wishart, and brought me a letter 	1
earl of Huntingdon, who pretended to dispute with 	1
earl of Huntly, having been one of the nobles who con- 	1
earl of Huntly's had been heard of, and no power su- 	1
earl of Huntly since the year 1548 8 . From this en- 	1
earl of Lennox, and the present earl was her grandson. The regent was 	1
earl of Morton, a member of the congregation, fluctu- 	1
earl of Morton, Bothwell, bishop of Orkney, Pitcairn, 	1
earl's spies and confidents ; many eyes watched all his 	1
earl's troops, who served, as is usual wherever the feudal 	1
early in the hands of the Scottish kings, who, as far 	1
early into her son the principles of a sincere love and 	1
earnestly on this conference upwards of four months, 	1
ease and elegance to external form, and which enable 	1
ease, or by means so unequal to the end. In a warlike 	1
ease. That so small a part of the nobles should pre- 	1
ease, the queen returned into Scotland, in full expect- 	1
easily escaped the rage of the clergy, who observed the 	1
easily prevailed on the parliament to give no ear to such 	1
easily repulsed by Murray's firm battalion. Before they 	1
easy matter to bind the nuptial knot anew ; and, though 	1
easy natural style ; sometimes she mistakes the sense ; but I 	1
e Cald. vol. ii. p. 15. 	1
ecclesiastical revenues. In vain did they propose, by 	1
ecclesiastics a . The lords of session were supreme 	1
ecclesiastics over the nation, these, as well as the real 	1
ecclesiastics to their former jurisdiction seemed to be a 	1
ecclesiastic ; that an act of oblivion, abolishing the guilt 	1
ed advices from her ministers of the sentimehts which 	1
ed all her art to gain George Douglas, her keeper's 	1
ed, and pursued with vigour ; sometimes concealed, or 	1
ed as the fortifications of that town then were, she did 	1
ed as valid, in all respects, as if it had been called by 	1
ed by a device, which, if not peculiar to themselves, binations. 	1
ed, discovers the reasons of his present conduct in con- 	1
ed during one hundred and sixty years ; and James the 	1
ed for the destruction of the protestants, and altered 	1
ed him with emulation; he knew it to be his interest to 	1
ed his fall, they rewarded their service by sharing among 	1
Edinburgh. 	2
Edinburgh, 8th Nov. 1758. 	1
Edinburgh, a more tranquil scene, to which yourself, and 	1
Edinburgh castle, though a protestant, maintained a 	1
Edinburgh, filled that city with the utmost conster- 	1
Edinburgh, for holding of our parliament on the 7th day of this instant, ami 	1
Edinburgh, had it in his power to be annually returned 	1
Edinburgh, had plainly intimated a design of embracing 	1
Edinburgh, his son, and several citizens of distinction, 	1
Edinburgh. I must at the same time lament, that the hurry 	1
Edinburgh in great confusion, and marched, without 	1
Edinburgh on the same day. Ibid. 100. He was summoned at his dwell- 	1
Edinburgh, the citation might have been given him sooner. Such an un- 	1
Edinburgh ; two years afterwards, the office of king's 	1
Edinburgh was the place whither the queen ought 	1
Edinburgh, where Huntly endeavoured, in vain, to ani- 	1
ed instances of contempt, the regent abandoned his 	1
ed. Institutions, which had no other object but to in- 	1
ed in the canon law, were led to sentences the most 	1
ed, in the strongest terms, what would be the fatal 	1
ed, nevertheless, regal power in its full extent. The 	1
ed of revenues far superior in value. 	1
ed only to fifty-three. The ecclesiastics equalled them in 	1
ed several French divines to reside in Scotland. At 	1
ed, that it would be deemed a reprehensible omission 	1
ed the eyes of Randolph. 	1
ed the first accounts of his promotion with the utmost 	1
ed, the prince possessed but little authority. A general, 	1
ed the queen's favour, subscribed this paper, the sus- 	1
ed the way to others ; the downfal of one impostor drew 	1
ed towards Stirling, burnt the town, and threatened to 	1
ed to West- manner which disappointed Elizabeth s views, and pro- 	1
education at the court of France. In vain did a few The treaty 	1
Edward, having thus placed a creature of his own 	1
Edwards, who, in the History of the West Indies, re- 	1
Edward the second, and some other weak princes, into 	1
Edward, who had no longer use for such a pageant 	1
ed with Elizabeth's displeasure, meanly betrayed the 	1
ed with great disadvantage ; and that cold service which 	1
ed, with her connivance, to engage the two nations in 	1
ed with much unanimity. Many, however, of the lords 	1
ed you for the opportunities which you have afforded me of 	1
effected it. While intent on this, he relaxed the vigour 	1
effected without difficulty, and on no unreasonable 	1
effecting any thing which could be of advantage to 	1
effect of necessity rather than of choice, she determined 	1
effects of her vengeance. These considerations sur- 	1
effects of such an imprudent step. He put this letter 	1
effects this vehement exhortation might have produced, 	1
effect was published 11 . 	1
effeminate aversion to arms, invited their more martial 	1
efforts, have been obliged to quit the field; and, far 1559. 	1
efforts of Edward the first abortive, often protected the 	1
E. GIBBON. 	3
eight children, of whom none but the historian rose 	1
eight ecclesiastics, together with the officers of the 	1
eighteen lords, and many gentlemen of distinction 11 . 	1
eight great officers of the crown. Of this body, the 	1
eighth are known to all the world. Moved by the ca- 	1
eighth of March, the twelfth of April was appointed 	1
eighth, prior to their committing that crime. In the papers of duke Ha- 	1
Eight persons were chosen to govern the kingdom 	1
eighty-nine lay-elders; the royal boroughs send sixty- 	1
either by his birth or by personal qualities. I could run out, 	1
either by Mary or her husband, it hath been asserted to be the cause of the 	1
either deceived the Scots, or removed their scruples ; 	1
either elude or venture to contemn them ; and the sta- 	1
either of his dignity, as the first nobleman in the king- 	1
either of private, or political, or religious quarrels, du- 	1
either to personal jealousy, or to the caprice of private 	1
either understanding to comprehend, or temper to ad- 	1
e Keith, 251. 	1
e Keith, Append. 159. f Camd. 396. .* Casteln. 464. 	1
e Keith, Append. 2145. ' Keith, Append. 31. 	1
e Knox, 256. ' See Append. No. V. * Lesley, 227. 	1
eldest sister of Henry the eighth, by the earl of Angus, 	1
eldest son an eminent lawyer at the Scotch bar; two 	1
eldest son from all right of succession, public or private, 	1
elected a member of the Royal Academy of History at 	1
elected the lords articulars." ]f we explain these words according to the 	1
election, or of gaining them when elected, the king com- 	1
elegance of his taste, and to the purity and vigour of 	1
eleven counties were summoned to guard the person, who was to act as 	1
eleven days' warning to prepare for accusing a person 	1
Elizabeth 	1
Elizabeth, about this time, abundantly compensated. 	1
Elizabeth affected the greatest surprise at this sud- April 18. 	1
Elizabeth affected to represent Mary's pretensions to 	1
Elizabeth afforded as seasonable relief to the regent's 	1
Elizabeth and her ministers. " Think not the Scots," 	1
Elizabeth As soon as Elizabeth got these into her possession, 	1
Elizabeth Before we turn towards this, it is necessary to ob- 	1
Elizabeth b , they despaired of any other means of safety, Oct 20 	1
Elizabeth*. But, though Elizabeth revolved all these 	1
Elizabeth concealed sentiments of a different nature. 	1
Elizabeth contributed, and perhaps not without de- 	1
Elizabeth. dors of foreign princes, of the usage she had hitherto 	1
Elizabeth early perceived many advantages which 	1
Elizabeth Elizabeth now began to be weary of keeping such a 	1
Elizabeth, even while she wished to direct Mary, treated the queen's 	1
Elizabeth From the time that Mary became sensible of the dif- 	1
Elizabeth g . Both the ambassadors were received with 	1
Elizabeth had declared against the proceedings of her 	1
Elizabeth had much at heart ; she proposed it both to 	1
Elizabeth had now reigned eight years without dis- 	1
Elizabeth herself would receive and examine her de- 	1
Elizabeth Home, his former wife, Lennox pretended that the sentence of 	1
Elizabeth. If at this time the English queen could 	1
Elizabeth nominated Thomas Howard, duke of Nor- 	1
Elizabeth No sooner did the queen of Scots submit her cause 	1
Elizabeth resolved that Mary should not enjoy the 	1
Elizabeth's advantage, both on her subjects and on her 	1
Elizabeth's artifices, into a situation where no liberty of 	1
Elizabeth's but did t jj vert h er f rom t h e prosecution of it. She 	1
Elizabeth's domestic tranquillity, more than any other 	1
Elizabeth's favourite. 	1
Elizabeth should, by her own authority, condemn her 	1
Elizabeth's intention to inflame, rather than to extin- commission- 	1
Elizabeth's jealousy, either as a woman or as a queen. 	1
Elizabeth's justice, and solicited her, with many tears, 	1
Elizabeth's person, she endeavoured to cultivate the 	1
Elizabeth's request, to put off the meeting of parlia- 	1
Elizabeth's throne, could not deny the queen of Scots 	1
Elizabeth's views were more various, and her schemes 	1
Elizabeth's wisdom and penetration were remarkable 	1
Elizabeth, though no stranger to Mary's difficulties 	1
Elizabeth to depress the royal authority in Scotland, 	1
Elizabeth to her crown is, thereby, acknowledged in 	1
Elizabeth took possession of the throne without oppo- of England, 	1
Elizabeth was influenced with regard to the affairs of 	1
Elizabeth was preparing to send a magnificent embassy 	1
Elizabeth, we may presume, did not wish that the Elizabeth's 	1
Elizabeth, which you had laboured so finely, little thinking it 	1
Elizabeth, who possessed great power, and acted with 	1
Elizabeth, who was jealous, in an extreme degree, of 	1
Elizabeth, who was never unwilling to interpose in the 	1
Elizabeth will open a way for her enemies into the heart 	1
Elizabeth would become the umpire between the Scot- 	1
eloquence and argument. At Robertson's first appear- 	1
eloquence. Instead of amusing himself with lopping 	1
eluded'. 	1
eluded, and no favour bestowed. Together with this increases. 	1
elude the motion. After allowing the first heat of their 	1
eluding this request, she did, in one respect, real ser- 	1
embarrassing. To gain possession of the most amiable 	1
embellished with learning, but prone to subtilty; the 	1
eminence, in each of these, possessed authority, more or 	1
eminence in virtue, nor superiority of abilities, the queen's 	1
eminent leaders of their party to testify to Elizabeth 	1
eminent reformers were themselves considerable masters 	1
emotions of her resentment, she wrote to her commis- personal au- 	1
emperor, it was the interest of both kings, that the 	1
employed captain Crawford, one of his creatures, to 	1
employed on any portion of history of the same length. I had 	1
employed private revenge to aid the impotence of pub- 	1
empted, on condition of their electing in each county, 	1
empting the professors of it from the rigour of those penal laws to which 	1
emulation, and inflamed by reciprocal injuries, is apt to 	1
enabled him, amidst the reeling and turbulence of fac- 	1
enabled him to demonstrate his high sense of fraternal 	1
enabled, with more certainty and precision than those of any other country 	1
ence, and to represent their sense of them to the king 	1
ence of so many nobles added lustre to her cause ; she 	1
ence of the archbishop of St. Andrew's, and which, by 	1
ence of the house of Bourbon. But I looked on it as 	1
ence on its decisions. The high strain in which the 	1
ence remov- -, . , -,. , i i-i- i ,1 i 	1
ences at York and Westminster were reviewed, and the 	1
ences, the popish preachers were either universally 	1
ence, that, after the struggles of a whole reign, he was 	1
ence ; the perpetual slave of his own fears, and, by 	1
ence to the religious points in dispute, made all her 	1
encouraged him, as far as decency would permit, to 	1
encouraged the reformers to extend their views, and 	1
encouragement, they had likewise greater success. The 	1
encouragement your lordship mentions will put in my 	1
encouraging them to sell their lands, which enriched 	1
encroachments should be made on the former, and no 	1
encroachments. Some of his rivals he secretly under- 	1
encroach upon the aristocracy ; the nobles not only re- 	1
end, and their mutual enmity burst out with every 	1
endangered her life, and alarmed the nation with the 	1
endanger her person. Such an outrage it was impossi- 	1
endeavoured to colour, by alleging that the body of 	1
endeavoured to conclude a separate peace with Spain. 	1
endeavoured to recover what Adrian had abandoned ; 	1
endeavouring, by any prudent concessions, to sooth and 	1
endeavours and address proved ineffectual. He found 	1
Endeavours Bothwell the power which he had acquired. But, 	1
end of the fifty-first year of the author's age. That honest 	1
ened by mutual injuries during the late commotions . 	1
ened by new dominions or alliances, they foresaw that 	1
ened by the smart of recent injuries, was the national 	1
ened, they were extremely apt to be alarmed, and to 	1
ened to strike the intended blow with his own hand. 	1
ened with no dangerous symptom, she returned the 	1
ened with the utmost satisfaction, and encouraged the 	1
enemies 1 '. Hence proceeded the confidence and affec- 	1
enemies ; and, as the princes of Lorrain were deemed 	1
enemies. He saw how vain and ineffectual all his pro- 	1
enemies of life, preyed upon his mind, and wasted and 	1
enemies, the confluence of her subjects from all corners 	1
enemies. The family of Douglas, which began to rise 	1
enemies to her person, determined to let him feel the 	1
enemy. After a few feeble and unsuccessful attempts 	1
enemy in number, consisted chiefly of the Hamiltons 	1
enemy of his country. Edward, finding Baliol the most 	1
enemy of the house of Hamilton. He had many claims 	1
enemy should arrive at Linlithgow, through which he 	1
enemy so much superior in number. A strong body of 	1
enemy superior in number, could not long be conducted 	1
enemy was either to be razed, or kept by the Scots, at 	1
engaged him to labour for their safety. The queen, 	1
engaged in conducting this perfidious and dishonour- 	1
engaged in the expedition, remained in their hands f . 	1
engage neither to assume the title, nor to bear the arms 	1
engaging openness and affability of behaviour. 	1
England, and concluded with the duke of Norfolk a treaty, the 	1
England ; and, even since the conclusion of the peace, 	1
England and Ireland, a fatal blow would have been 	1
England, and kept there in more rigorous confine- 	1
England and then to France, he seems from that time 	1
England; and to permit her either to live at liberty 	1
England, and, under colour of supporting Mary's title 	1
England; a step, which, on many accounts, ought to 	1
England, before the ancient alliance with France. By 	1
England, but upon her own subjects . As every step 	1
England continued, the clergy had no leisure to molest 	1
England, did not abate the warmth and zeal of their 	1
England ; England, and declared for the interests of France g . 	1
England, he adhered to his vow with unrelenting ob- 	1
England, he experienced how much a king beloved by 	1
England, Henry was obliged to give up his own pro- 	1
England, he sent ambassadors into Scotland, to pro- 	1
England. Hostilities had subsisted between the two 	1
England supplies both of money and provisions ; and, 	1
England, that the regent lost much of the public con- ^ n l t he re ' 	1
England, the security of the counties in the heart of the kingdom. 	1
England, they had warmly espoused her interest ; and 	1
England. Though succession by hereditary right be 	1
England ; to surrender to Elizabeth the places of 	1
England was an object worthy of her ambit jon. Her 	1
England would consider this evidence as sufficient to 	1
English ambassador could hardly be protected from it. 	1
English ambassador in France, explained her senti- 	1
English arms, or the remonstrances of the Scottish male- 	1
English cavalry, flushed with an advantage which they 	1
English crown, and to swear fealty to him as their 	1
English did not fail to revive it, in all the subsequent 	1
English from the treaty of Chateau en Cambresis, and 	1
English had occupied before the "battle of Pinkie. 	1
English history to myself, to the world, and to him. 	1
English language, has, at my request, undertaken the transla- 	1
English more fortunate in an attempt which they made 	1
English privy council in the same strain '. Mary art- 	1
English secretary. Keith, 229. 232. 	1
English succession was to be decided in favour of the 	1
English themselves, the Roman catholics, who formed, at 	1
English to think of bringing his kingdom under de- 	1
English trenches, broke their troops, nailed part of 	1
engrossed him more than became a king. Accordingly, 	1
engrossed that share in the queen's confidence, to which 	1
engrossed the king's affection, were Cochran a mason, 	1
engrosses 	1
ening aspect. 	1
ening aspect of affairs at Mary's return into Scotland ; 	1
enjoyed power too long to be a favourite of the nation. 	1
enjoyed ; the effects of the reformation would naturally 	1
enjoy, to become dependent on her own subjects, to 	1
enlarged the views of the human mind, an English 	1
enough to expect any thing more than connivance and 	1
enough to listen to proposals for an accommodation; 	1
enraged at his presumption. The queen's partiality 	1
enraged, because he had proceeded so far, others mur- 	1
enriched his pen with the elegancies of language, often 	1
ensigns of the order of St. Michael. The instructions 	1
ensuing week ; this gave him warning some days sooner, that she intended 	1
entered the apartment of their sovereign, seized all his 	1
entering along with them. All the terrour and con- 	1
enterprise, carried on in defiance of all the laws of which 	1
enterprise gave their friends at a distance no time to 	1
enterprising, and commanded a powerful and martial 	1
entertained of its genuineness and authenticity. But it 	1
entertained sentiments different from mine, with re- 	1
entertained the same sentiments concerning it ; and in 	1
entire and uncontrolled exercise of power, she sacrificed 	1
entirely discouraged the attempt r . 	1
entirely forfeited her favour m . At the same time, the 	1
entirely into the arms of those who adhered to her own 	1
entirely the confidence of the queen regent, endeavour- 	1
entire volume; but afterwards abandoned, or rather 	1
ent reception, they were not more successful in one 	1
ents, in order to overawe or to frustrate the decisions 	1
ent, though the princes who wore it were, for many 	1
envied, and had some reason to dread. 	1
envied his uncle Ferdinand the acquisition of so im- 	1
envied the power of Cecil, and endeavoured to wrest 	1
envy, the valuable society which you possess in so narrow a 	1
eodem tempore in aula occiditur. Sic niger hie nebulo, nigra quoque morte 	1
equal abilities; Cecil, her prime minister, a man per- 	1
equalled, at all times, and often controlled, that of the 	1
equally irritating and offensive ; on the one hand, a 	1
equally necessary to both. 	1
equals and the rivals of their prince. Many of the earls 	1
equal to his rapaciousness, and which defeated his am- 	1
equal to his station. With these dispositions he might 	1
equitable; she insisted, however, that Elizabeth should 	1
er- 	1
ercised the same jurisdiction which formerly belonged 	1
erected these kingdoms, though divided into different 	1
er&lt; impatient of that opposition, which he imputed wholly 	1
erown itself. 	1
error, I shall quietly, and without reluctance, correct it. 	1
errours of popery ; and, notwithstanding this change in 	1
errours of popery may be, some inquiry and attention 	1
errours. Wherever I am satisfied that my original 	1
ers, as it may, with the concurrence of a majority of 	1
ers ; but he wanted either courage or strength to exe- 	1
ers, had hitherto disappointed. At last, Mary employ- 	1
ers seems pretty apparent : and both Knox and the manifesto 	1
ers taken at Langside a . 	1
ers. This dismal reverse happened exactly one month 	1
ers, throwing aside their spears, and breaking their 	1
ers to hear the pleadings of both parties, and wrote to 	1
ers, who, applying to these the denunciations in the 	1
e Sadler, 339. 356. Hamilton manuscripts, i. 470, etc. 	1
escape along with her, attended by three persons only, 	1
escaping into France, was dangerous, and, in her situa- 	1
e See Dissertation at the end of the History. 	1
espouse so warmly the defence of the congregation, are 	1
ess, though his real valour, as well as integrity and 	1
establish concord between the queen and her subjects, 	1
established by law, and esteemed throughout the king- 	1
established church, with a vehemence peculiar to him- 	1
established government, which afforded such ample 	1
established, the right of Baliol was preferable ; and, 	1
establishment by'civil authority, seems to have suggested 	1
establish the truth of the accusation. Nothing could 1568. 	1
estates as the reward of their valour, and who consi- 	1
estates of most of the ancient Scottish barons, granted 	1
estates, their lives, their honour, are at stake. It is 	1
ested ze'al, the German theologian boldly erected the 	1
esteem ; and he has made me an offer, if I would translate his 	1
esteemed most sadred. This rupture, which is a strong 	1
esteemed so much ; but you have greatly enhanced its value, 	1
esteem of the writer whom I admire. 	1
e Strype, Eccles. Mem. i. App. 155. 	1
etc. of his own vassals. And, on some extraordinary 	1
etc. See Appendix, No. XVIII. 	1
ety. Mary, by refusing so often to ratify the treaty of 	1
Europe. Compassion for a monarch who would then 	1
Europe. In the progress of this work, however, he 	1
Europe. Kingdoms, which were inconsiderable, when 	1
Europe. Their perpetual enmity was not owing solely 	1
even against the houses in which the sacred blood of a 	1
Even amidst that scene of joy which always accom- 	1
Even Bothwell himself did not rely on the judgment 	1
even contemptible, the party grew, by degrees, to great 	1
even contempt, with which the queen received their re- 	1
even courted the pope's protection, who had sent her a 	1
even excel, and, I think, in a sensible degree, your 	1
even forced the castle to surrender, and inflicted on the 	1
even if you be in the right with regard to the last, (of which, 	1
even in the palaces of kings ; when the officers of the 	1
Even in very advanced years, the wisest woman of that, 	1
even pretended, out of complaisance towards her, to put 	1
even put on the appearance of this passion. Notwith- 	1
event, acquired by the clergy, must have proved a con- 	1
even the passive spirit of Baliol began to mutiny. But 	1
Even the sanguinary measures of his father provoked 	1
event not very distant. The French king had lately 	1
event of her reign, and required all her art and dex- 	1
even to moderate, its rage. If, in order to quell it, 	1
events. 	1
events happened that opened . to him vast projects, 	1
events of a civil war. However, if our statesmen had 	1
events, or to the characters of the most distinguished 	1
events shew either to have been entered into with too 	1
events, the Scots would stand exposed to all the ven- 	1
event unexpectedly happened which saved both. If 	1
event which could give firmness and stability to that 	1
Even under the aristocratical form of government 	1
even without her knowledge 6 . Though she was far 	1
even without restoring the queen, it was an easy matter 	1
ever additional security their anxiety for personal safety, 	1
ever am, etc. 	1
ever assembled, resisted all the efforts of the regent for 	1
ever cut off a . Each of these considerations had its in- 	1
ever differences might still remain k . 	1
ever, far from being an engine at the king's disposal, 	1
ever, I cannot forbear observing, on what a different footing 	1
ever impressions her emissaries might have made on 	1
ever is not born in England, or at least of parents who, 	1
ever much I may wish to have a point fixed so much 	1
ever, on the same day she received the account of his 	1
ever ready to sacrifice their lives in defence of his per- 	1
ever recovered any degree of power, his destruction 	1
ever sort they came unto us, i. e. whether they returned to England volun- 	1
ever, that he should sign, in token of consent, all the 	1
ever, the gift of the queen, but of the nation ; and the 	1
ever, to demand the accomplishment of it ; but their 	1
ever, were made to support this impolitic and premature 	1
every argument against the repeal of the penal laws, 	1
every art to wipe out the memory of past misconduct, 	1
every case that can possibly happen, have at last in- 	1
Every circumstance seems to have combined against 	1
every civil commotion, the superiority of the latter has 	1
every day more odious to the nobles, the prospect of 	1
every disadvantage. For these reasons she once more 	1
Every offender sheltered himself under the protection 	1
every other action in Mary's life could be justified by 	1
every possible demonstration of respect, and concur 	1
every pretender to her crown, and no less anxious to 	1
every pretender to the succession, not only with that 	1
every rank ; the love of novelty, or the conviction of 	1
every Scotchman with indignation. Murray, she pre- 	1
every step he took, a settled resolution to extirpate their 	1
Every step taken by Bothwell had hitherto been at- 1567. 	1
Every thing beyond that short period to which well- 	1
every thing contained in this reply; her high spirit, 	1
every thing in religion which she deemed venerable or 	1
every thing relative to the queen of Scots, she seems to 	1
every thing that happened during several years of tran- 	1
every thing, the reverse of Beatoun's. He was neither T 	1
every thing, this small matter contributed to confirm 	1
every thing to fear. 	1
every thing was fondly given up to the one, that had 	1
evidence more authentic and more impartial than that 	1
evidence of Mary's guilt he might produce, she was 	1
evidence produced by the regent of Scotland against 	1
evidence to appear against them, the persons accused 1567. 	1
evident marks of inferiority. Parliaments were often 	1
evils, universal monarchy, raised up Francis the first, to 	1
e Winzet. ap. Keith, Append. 202. 205. Lesley de Reb. Gest. Scot. 232. 	1
exalt the queen's character, and appear no less splendid 	1
examination, and would redound little to their fame, 	1
examined, and publicly recognised, and particularly 	1
examined with rigour, and every trial proved fatal to 	1
examining the circumstances of the case with calmness, 	1
example of James the first had taught him, that wise 	1
examples of falsehood, and some of severity, in the latter 1560. 	1
examples, which were familiar to Mary from her in- 	1
exasperate and inflame these passions. She had en- 	1
exasperated by neglect, preyed gradually on his rea- 	1
exasperated the Scots. They considered him, and 	1
excessive V 	1
excess of a virtue, rather than any vice, poisoned all 	1
excited against those corrupt doctrines which had per- 	1
excited among the Scots. They regarded it as the only 	1
excited any suspicion concerning the truth of the doc- 	1
excite her jealousy or her fears. His father's estate 	1
excite in a place taken by storm, filled the city on this 	1
excluded from a free intercourse with England, where 	1
excluded her from any legal right of succession. The 	1
excursions to different parts of the country, and suf- 	1
excuse for proceeding to such extremities. It is likewise remarkable, that 	1
execute their commands with implicit submission g ; and, 	1
executing their boldest designs. That portion of their 	1
executing the latter. It had not yet become honour- 	1
execution of his vengeance. But, in the spring, a con- 	1
execution of the famous George Wishart, a man of ho- 	1
execution of these laws feeble, irregular, and partial. 	1
exercise of religious worship, according to the form 	1
exercise of the reformed religion had been introduced their 	1
exile, however, was destined to be the father of a race 	1
expected by her enemies. Several attempts had been 	1
expected from such a performance aj that juncture, on 	1
expected from the temper of the nation '. 	1
expected. In these circumstances, Mary, by ratifying" 	1
expected it. The ambition of the house of Guise, and 	1
expected. She rejected it in a peremptory tone, with 	1
expected that the rigour of her proceedings would prove 	1
expect. She, without disguise or apology, avowed to 	1
expedience at this juncture of the measure in question, 	1
expedients. 	1
expedients for carrying it on. The countess of Len- 	1
expedients in her mind, and kept them in reserve to be 	1
expedients proposed ; and, on that foundation, Arran's 	1
expedients were to be employed. 	1
expedition against the freebooters on the Borders, he 	1
expedition into Scotland, written by W. Patten, who was joined in commis- 	1
expense, secured to them such valuable possessions. 	1
expert man, called the common speaker of the parliament, who shall propose 	1
explain my idea of the import of the act. I request of your 	1
exploits. 	1
exposed Elizabeth to much and deserved censure, and 	1
exposed t? less reproach. Bothwell could not help 	1
expose her to the hostile attempts of the latter. She 	1
expose the crimes of their sovereign to the eyes of 	1
expose themselves in so good a cause, flocked in such 	1
expressed ah 1 the resentment natural to an high-spirited 	1
expressed in those decided terms which became the 	1
exquisite models of free government, far superior to 	1
extant p , for remitting considerable sums into Scotland. 	1
extant, the following deserves notice : " If any associate shall either eat or 	1
extended to all matters which formerly came under the 	1
extended to sacred things only ; they claimed no seat 	1
extend her own influence in that kingdom b ; and, per- 	1
extend its dominion over Scotland, united at that time 	1
extend like extremities and destruction to all towns and villages, where- 	1
extensive ; and the great offices of the empire are all hereditary, and annexed 	1
extensive, but more united, than the emperor's. His 	1
extensive frontier against the incursions of an active 	1
extensive nor rich, could not contain many such over- 	1
extinction of that party appeared to be inevitable, and 	1
extirpate it. The regent, indeed, consented to every 	1
extort it from the reluctant hand of their sovereign, or, 	1
EXTRACTS 	1
EXTRACTS, ETC. xxxi 	1
extraoi'dinary charge, together with the disbursements 	1
extraordinary and ill-timed propositions. They were 	1
extraordinary, and the conduct which might be proper 	1
extraordinary precocity of genius. Unlike those plants 	1
extravagance. 	1
extreme approbation of them. To say only they are 	1
extreme coldness, and prudently declined engaging the 	1
extremely fatal to it ; and one accidental blow humbled 	1
extremely mortifying. To accuse his sovereign before 	1
extremely proper for the commission of that crime, 	1
extremely short ; imbittered by much anxiety, and dis- 	1
extremely simple. The influence of religion concurred 	1
extremely solicitous to humble that order. They did 	1
extremely tragical; but both were rendered abortive, 	1
extremely unsatisfactory. The blood of their adver- 	1
extreme necessity. On this occasion, the reformers 	1
extreme necessity. Such a necessity did the parliament 	1
eye. 	1
eye to him, and also keep him short." Ibid. p. 149. 	1
f 11 . i , . , . , Dunbar. 	1
fabric from the pollution, with which they supposed 	1
fabulous. Nations, as well as men, arrive at maturity fabulous* 	1
f According to an account of this event in the Hamilton manuscripts, 	1
facilitating his acquisition of objects so worthy of desire. 	1
facility and complaisance. In spite of all the warnings 	1
faction, as she had formerly given to the queen's 6 . 	1
faction, as to that of the nation. The Scots soon found, 	1
faction. Many things asserted in it, are evidently false or exaggerated. 	1
factions deprived both their arms and councils of their 	1
faction, the encroachments of which they had long 	1
factious and tumultuary spirit. But, as a state of order 	1
factory evidence. The ascendant he had gained over 	1
facts contained in the foregoing pages have been de- 	1
fact, seemingly so repugnant to all our reasonings con- 	1
failure of these, she were declared next heir by act of 	1
faire monsieur Robertson. If he be engaged by my persua- 	1
fairly told me, that if such a proposition had been 	1
fairs 1 '. These considerations, which were powerfully 	1
faith, in times of darkness and of ignorance, met with 	1
fall a second time into the hands of her subjects, there 	1
fallen, and presaging, perhaps, the disasters and cala- 	1
fallen a sacrifice to their union; a reformation, upon 	1
fallen on means to shake or corrupt the fidelity of sir 	1
falls short, on both sides, of legal and formal evidence. Buchanan and 	1
false miracles, they now endeavoured to call in these to 	1
false zeal for religion, quickly supplied this want. Nor- 	1
fame and safety of princes, as well as of their people, 	1
fame of the author; that the materials are collected 	1
familiar, and excite little horrour . I return from this 	1
family. Had any such design ever existed, it was Randolph's duty to have 	1
family, like a river, became considerable from the length 	1
family of Angus ; and, during the minority of the pre- 	1
family was devoted to destruction ; and, dreading to be 	1
family; while, in return for these empty honours, he 	1
famous book concerning the Government of Women, wherein, conformable 	1
famous contest between the houses of Valois and Plan- 	1
fancy, could hardly fail of diminishing that horrour of 	1
f Anders, i. 87. t Ibid. 136. ii. 276. 	1
f Anders, vol. iv. 32. Melv. 181. 	1
fantastic title of her adopted father. 	1
far advanced. Bothwell seems to have been wounded in a scuffle, occa- 	1
fare of the prince her son. Neither of these pro- 	1
far exceeded that of any other subject, and his ' supe- 	1
far inferior to either of them in abilities and address, 	1
farther and more dangerous views. They saw the 	1
far towards excluding any of the competitors from the 	1
fast the prey which they had seized; and, bestowing 	1
fatal event ; but some imperfect chronicles had escaped 	1
fatal to the nation with greater eagerness, and with more 	1
fatal to then* interest. They endeavoured to inspire 	1
fatal to the Scots in that age, commanded this army, and 	1
Fate of Amidst so many great and unexpected events, the 	1
fate of that nobleman to be governed, in every instance, 	1
fate of those who had suffered at Lauder did not de- 	1
father's designs, was seized in the south, and upon trial 	1
father to son, and were become perpetual. These 	1
father was then minister : he was one of a family of 	1
favour. 	1
favour". 	1
favourable circumstances. Mary was young, gay, and 	1
favourable our kings, who was so unfortunate as to be placed in 	1
favour and confidence '. But the archbishop of St. w 	1
favour at court; and, whatever secret partiality the 	1
favour by some important services. But their friend- 	1
favoured by my friends with several remarks upon it; 	1
favoured Huntly's designs, or stood in awe of his power, 	1
favourites, and all the vices of a feeble mind, are vi- 	1
favourites except one Ramsay, whom they could not 	1
favour of the duke of Chatelherault. The zeal with 	1
favour of the protestant religion, were publicly ratified ; 	1
favour or her gratitude. The former is an expedient 	1
favour? S dit with the queen, and soon gained an ascendant over 	1
favours she had bestowed, contempt of her person, 	1
favours were no longer conveyed through his hands. 	1
favour they had gained ; and reduced the royal autho- 	1
favour to any other man upon the continent. 	1
f Buchan. 371. h Buch. 372. See Appendix, No. XXVIII. 	1
f Caes. ibid. 	1
f D'Ewes' Journ. of Parl. 105. 	1
fealty at his feet, and acknowledging him to be their 	1
feared and hated his nobles, kept them at an unusual 	1
feared the cardinal, or who desired a change in religion, 	1
fear or of danger. The protestants beheld with regret 	1
fear, that she never closed her eyes, till she reached 	1
feated. 6 soon obliged to give ground, and the rout immediately 	1
feated in the execution. Nothing now was wanting 	1
Feb. 1. take his title ; and, that he might be better able to sup- 	1
Feb. 21. schemes of ambition, he ventured to write to the queen, 	1
Feb. 25. suffer him to proceed on his journey. Before his de- 	1
Feb. 2. The regent was now impatient to return into Scot- 	1
February, the court at the same time, their followers quarrelled 	1
fect contained the strongest declarations of his faithful 	1
fected, or absurd : but the language of business is nearly 	1
fected the manners of a girl p . Though Elizabeth was 	1
fect harmony will be restored among your own subjects, 	1
fection for him : and though this made impression on 	1
fect mode of a letter, consult you on the propriety and merit 	1
fect police. He made choice, among the estates of par- 	1
fect required the queen to evacuate the town in terms 	1
fectually secured the peace of her own kingdom. The 	1
federates were at the utmost pains to strengthen their 	1
feeble and dilatory. An attempt to punish the crimes 	1
feeble opposition of an illiterate and immoral clergy. 	1
feel the utmost weight of her resentment. As the gra- 	1
feited the esteem and confidence of the whole nation. 	1
fell in with a vessel richly laden, and immediately at- 	1
felt and resented. In this situation, the attention and 	1
felt in mortifying a rival, whose beauty and accomplish- 	1
felt on account of his brother's death and his own in- 	1
female heart, and entirely to overcome it. Unhappily, 	1
fence, and the command of it given to Ramsay, lately 	1
fenceless ; but this too was quickly surrounded by a 	1
fence of his dominions. At his command, they assem- 	1
fence of the kingdom, and his boldness revived the 	1
fences u ; she meant to consider her as an equal, for 	1
fences were aggravated into real crimes, and punished 	1
fence ; they entered into a secret correspondence with 	1
fence. to take this bold step without delay. It was but a small 	1
fence to the people ; that the protestant opinions were 	1
fended all their actions. Truth was not the sole 	1
fend, I have thought necessary here to utter. Hackbutters have they few 	1
fending Leith f . Bothwell openly favoured her cause, 	1
fend that right to the uttermost, against whatever per- 	1
f England, and which raised a storm that threatened 	1
fensive, prevented the French from attempting any en- 	1
fered considerably by gaining this point. The original 	1
fered few to go out of the world, without leaving marks 	1
fered his trial to be carried on, and the indecent speed 	1
fered near a month to elapse, before she visited him at 	1
fered such a public accusation to remain unanswered ; 	1
ference ; and, notwithstanding the satisfaction she ex- ^^abeth' 	1
ferent issue. From beginnings extremely feeble, and 	1
ferently. It is evident, said they, that Mary either 	1
ferent plots for her relief. Notwithstanding the vigi- 	1
Ferguson's book c has a great deal of genius and fine writ- 	1
Ferguson's book goes on here with great success. A few 	1
fer honour, and win the hearts of men. From all cor- 	1
fering of interest, the unsettled state of property, the 	1
ferior to no persons of that age in address and political 	1
ferred on him the office of regent ; and the public voice 	1
ferred the kingdom of Scotland, with whatever inherit- 	1
ferred this office, and along with him he sent the queen 	1
ferred to the decision of civil judges q . By a third sta- 	1
ferred upon men who possessed little influence, and ex- 	1
ferring the crown matrimonial on the dauphin; and 	1
fessed. The reestablishment of the Romish doctrine favour of 	1
fession of his adversary screened him from the effects 	1
fessions of his own zeal for the catholic religion, and ~~ 	1
fessions of their future loyalty and obedience 2 . But 	1
fessor of church history in the university of Edinburgh. 	1
fest in the concluding clause. In her first proclamation the queen had de- 	1
festival, by a dinner at his house. Some of our common 	1
feudal government, deserve our notice. " And because it is necessary for 	1
feudal governments, the nobles were not only the king's 	1
feudal kingdoms, such as held of the king in chief were 	1
fever b . Her life was despaired of; but her youth, and 	1
few, and the progress which they made was of course 	1
few books have done more than this, towards clearing 	1
few endeavoured to save themselves by flight ; the Eng- 	1
few or no traces of a well-arranged police. But under 	1
few persons to remain unconcerned spectators of an 	1
few weeks, and while a fierce and impetuous courage 	1
f Good. vol. ii. 184. s Anders, vol. iii. 25. 	1
f Haynes, 574. State Trials, i. 79, 80. 	1
fications of Leith and Dunbar should immediately be 	1
ficed to their zeal. 	1
ficers, was despatched into England, on pretence of 	1
ficial and false colouring she employs, it is easy to dis- 	1
ficient freedom. No revolution, whether civil or religious, 	1
ficiently accustomed to the historic style, you employed too 	1
ficient to have disturbed a more vigorous administra- 	1
ficient vindication of her innocence. 	1
fidence by consenting to it. The cardinal, who had 	1
fied at great expense, and, in the opinion of the age, 	1
fiefs, granted at first during pleasure, descended from 	1
field against enemies superior in number, and formi- 	1
field, and to advance towards Leith. But, as Elizabeth 	1
field for the career of his ambition. " References to 	1
field laboured, by negotiating both with the queen 	1
field must sometimes be opened for the display of 	1
field, the vigour with which she acted, and the length 	1
fierce and mutinous spirit of the nobles, unrestrained 	1
fierce and warlike people ; and, having repulsed, rather 	1
fierceness which national antipathy, kindled by long 	1
fierce spirit of the feudal nobles was not to be subdued 	1
fifteenth centuries, abounds with detestable instances 	1
fifth, and have above one third of it finished, I would 	1
fifth, and of Mary of Guise, was horn a few tlays be- ^nbei- 1 ^ 	1
fifth ; he at length determined for the latter : but be- 	1
fifth of August, he ratified a treaty with Henry f , and 	1
fifty thousand crowns ; they promised to contribute li- 	1
fight in single combat any gentleman of good fame, 	1
filed it, they, in direct contradiction to one article in 	1
files were very deep, and their ranks close. They ad- 	1
filled his bosom by turns. The violence of these pas- 	1
filled the human mind with more liberal and generous well as 	1
filled the kingdom with persons active in promoting the 	1
finally, I know not. I beg leave only to say, that how- 	1
find employment for all Henry's forces, and, from an 	1
find himself better served, than by relying on those who may 	1
find some who were the queen's chief confidents, others 	1
find, that we shall agree in almost all the material parts of 	1
finement, may be mentioned among the circumstances 	1
finest performances he ever read ; and though he expected 	1
finished form. Soon after the murder of the king, this 	1
finished her short and inglorious reign. Her sister the crown 	1
finished, it was agreed that Elizabeth could not, con- 	1
finished, unless some new extravagance come across the phi- 	1
firm. 	1
firmer tone, and avowed, more openly than ever, their 	1
firmest support of their cause q . 	1
firm footing in that kingdom, than he began to enter 	1
firmly attached to the English interest would quickly 	1
first, a generous prince, solemnly renounced this claim 	1
first. Among these, Robert Bruce, and John Baliol, two 	1
first began to suspect some change in the regent's dis- 	1
first Christians, oppressed by continual persecutions, and 	1
first consequence of the duke's success; and if the 	1
first duties of morality, affected the highest regard for 	1
first. Ibid. 102. Though Lennox resided at that time forty miles from 	1
first subject in the kingdom, both in dignity and in 	1
first, to make one bold push for recovering his autho- 	1
fit person to enter the lists with active and martial ba- 	1
fitted to influence and rouse his audience. 	1
five hundred and forty-two. 	1
five months n , in a place which a single battalion, with 	1
fixed, and regularity, power, and splendour conferred 	1
fixed, and sat constantly at Edinburgh; and, though 	1
fixed ; but the princes, whose province it was to inflict 	1
fixed external policy became necessary for the govern-^ 	1
fixed resolution of punishing those minions whose in- 	1
fix such a brand of infamy on her character. If she 	1
fix their residence at Edinburgh ; and, by their ap- 	1
fix the time when his translation will appear." 	1
f Keith, 407. r Ibid. 415. 	1
f Keith, Append. 188. Spotsw. 183. 	1
flames an aged priest, who had been convicted of em- 	1
flattered himself that he would acquire such merit both 	1
flattered him with the prospect of immense riches, aris- 	1
fled for shelter to his kinsman, the bishop of Murray ; 	1
fled into Argyleshire, in expectation of aid from Eliza- 	1
fled into England, and put themselves under the pro- 	1
fled into Scotland. What they had seen and felt in 	1
fled out of the kingdom, if the approach of an English 	1
fled the repeated efforts of Edward, and counterba- 	1
fled to his seat in Norfolk. Intimidated by the im- 	1
Fleece, and by offering him a match in the imperial 	1
Fleming. 	1
f Lesley, 224. 	1
flight, are mentioned by Randolph. Keith, 291. 4. A great part of the 	1
float in my mind ; and, if I should ever form any serious re- 	1
flocked in, eager and determined to aid, with their 	1
Flowden ; and, if we may judge either from their con- 	1
flowers. Every man I meet, and still more every lady, 	1
fluctuation of power and of property ; though old fami- 	1
fluenced by the nobles who returned from England ; 	1
fluence in that assembly. The superstition of former 	1
fluence in the nation, equal to that which others de- 	1
fluence of his army in Scotland obtained the concurrence 	1
fluence of prosperity to alter the character and to cor- 	1
fluence on Murray, and all of them determined him to 	1
fluence upon the fate of distant nations. Her assist- 	1
fluence with the queen was employed in his behalf, and 	1
fly from court, whither he durst not return till the earl's 	1
folk, Thomas RadclifFe, earl of Sussex, and sir Ralph 	1
folk to communicate the matter to the regent. He 	1
followed a leader, whom they regarded both as the su- 	1
followed; the servants belonging to the chapel were 	1
followers, before that place, he fled with precipitation 	1
followers completely armed, were summoned to assist 1561. 	1
followers crossing their pike points with them forward ; and thus each with 	1
followers, nor would they have deserted him in this manner. 	1
followers of Argyll and Huntly, who composed the 	1
follow him through the various scenes in which he dis- 	1
following are extracts immediately relating to the pro- 	1
follow the reduction of the Scottish malecontents, by 	1
fomenting this unhappy quarrel. Ingratitude for the 	1
fonder of retirement than ever, and, sunk in indolence 	1
fondness and credulity natural to the unfortunate, for 	1
fondness, she had conferred upon him, he had employed 	1
fools preferred your, style to mine. Certainly it had 	1
footing of finding in each other's productions something 	1
footing which rendered her victory not only apparent, 	1
for accommodating their differences, he was employed, ~~ 	1
for a husband. Such considerations of prudence are, 	1
for a moment to the courtship of a man lately married under her own eye in 	1
for any event which would restore their order to its 	1
for Arran himself y . 	1
for a season, statutes which were not good. Even the 	1
for assist- 	1
for assistance, and expected soon to have the conspira- 	1
for believing that there is some foundation for what has been asserted with 	1
Forbes, and of which he published only two volumes, 	1
force; and, encouraged by some princes from piety, 	1
forced by the violence of a storm to take refuge in one 	1
forced her to think of beginning this disagreeable 	1
forced tears from her eyes, both in public and in pri- 	1
forced tears from her eyes. But before Melvil was 	1
force Mar into a compliance with his demands l . And 	1
forcement to the congregation, augmented the queen's 	1
force or fraud, of many historical monuments, -which 	1
forces had laid open to them all the country situated 	1
forces ; no place in Scotland was to remain in the hands 	1
forces, or surprised any place of strength, or rescued 	1
forces which they had assembled; that was reserved 	1
Force the surrendered to Strozzi, who engaged, in the name of 	1
for civil war, were the effects of their resentment. 	1
for crimes was retaliation ; the offender forfeited limb 	1
ford them her aid towards obstructing a measure so dis- 	1
Fordun, who lived in the fourteenth century, collected 	1
fore a number so far inferior, without striking a single 	1
fore breakfast, devoting the rest of the day to the 	1
fore he could be dragged through the next apartment, 	1
foreign countries, obliged him to attend to his own 	1
foreign forces were called in, this would give the alarm 	1
foreign jurisdiction 11 . Thus almost every question, in 	1
foreign parts. It is almost impossible to form any 	1
foreign troops into a kingdom at peace with all the 	1
fore the death of her father. The situation in which !542, and 	1
fore the earl of Lennox, and acted in concert with the 	1
fore the expiration of these, engaged to transport the 	1
fore the introduction of surnames, or ensigns armorial. 	1
for every chieftain to bestow a portion, in the first place, 	1
fore vowels to prevent the cacophony, and ought never 	1
fore we trace the progress of this great work, it will be 	1
for execution. The Scottish nobles, after their utmost 	1
for extending their jurisdiction were exactly similar to those employed by 	1
for France, with which their trade had been interrupted 	1
forgetting so far the duty of a subject, as to accuse his 	1
forgiveness of those to whom they had been hurtful ; 	1
forgot the immense superiority of their own strength 	1
for hearing, in person, the complaints of those who 	1
for her defence a . Having thus left all the country be- 	1
for her husband, was rendered still more insupportable 	1
for her remissness. Several suspected persons were 	1
for her to deprive him of the supreme direction of af- 	1
for him to make head, in that country, against his ene- 	1
for his past conduct, he insinuated that the duke's 	1
for. If he knew my situation with general Conway he pro- 	1
for limb, and life for life. The payment of a compen- 	1
formable to the crafty policy which distinguishes his 	1
form and to improve them. 	1
for Mary's attention at this conjuncture. They hadjects. 	1
for Mary to penetrate into the motives of this sudden 	1
formation. No more than three hundred men marched 	1
formation satisfied none of his subjects. Some were 	1
formed against the life of Murray ; others call in question the truth of the 	1
formed all religious offices in the kingdom. The ex- 	1
formed an army above six thousand strong. In their 	1
formed a resolution equally bold and politic. He com- 	1
formed associations, which, when made with their equals, 	1
formed by sir Robert Melvil, in the name of Athol, 	1
formed clergy, and to set the queen's conduct in the 	1
formed concerning the extraordinary steps which they 	1
formed no scheme dangerous or detrimental to the 	1
formed them, her administration became remarkable, 	1
formed themselves into more regular factions, and dis- 	1
former alliance with the queen of Scots; and though 	1
former baseness, and enraged at the many indignities 	1
former fame. But their exploits were not considerable. 	1
former historians, as I have placed facts in a different 	1
former kind ; but really neither my leisure nor inclina- 	1
former kings, which occasioned their miscarriage. The 	1
formerly ; and, by her permission, some of the ancient 	1
former prosperity. 	1
former scheme, however suitable to the religious spirit 	1
former services ; and Mary, impatient of contradiction, 	1
formers were attended by crowded and admiring audi- 	1
formers were condemned ; and, at the same time, she 	1
former were called to assist with their opinion. Knox 	1
former with intolerable insolence, and tyrannised over 	1
former would for ever reproach her for a change 	1
formidable. Catherine, instead of encouraging the am- 	1
formidable land army p . 	1
formidable to the crown, were declared unlawful 8 . En- 	1
forming an acquaintance with several men of merit who de- 	1
formly inflexible. She expressed a great veneration Her dissi- 	1
form. The queen employed the earl of Huntly and 	1
for my honour, and which will give such stability to all 	1
for offering them well chosen. But either the queen's 	1
for Oliver Sinclair, his favourite, who no sooner ap- 	1
for perpetrating this horrid deed were frequently ap- 	1
for popery, and the converts to the protestant opinions, 	1
for redress ; and Mary resolving to hold a court of jus- 	1
for sincere. Finding so great a part of the nation wil- 	1
for some time a small body of them among the moun- 	1
for some time, observed this storm gathering, and were 	1
for some time. These were driven by stress of weather 	1
for substantial services : but, at last, the cardinal's ar- 	1
for such as had been concerned in the murder of the 	1
for support from that quarter. She had much to hope 	1
fort, and endure any extremity, rather than give her 	1
for the approach of death with a decent fortitude. 	1
for the common cause. Lord Erskine, governor of 	1
for the declaration of his credence, which, as I perceive by him, consisteth 	1
for the establishment of his new authority, and the exe- 	1
for the genius of his age or country ; and his enterpris- 	1
For the honour of human nature it must, however, be 	1
for their comforts, that their combat is not likely to make half 	1
for their security, and the weak were obliged to court 	1
for their zeal and their piety, had great weight with 	1
for the liturgy of the church of England; she IHfcJJjJ^w 	1
for the preservation of it, to assemble at Edinburgh, 	1
for the preservation of the established religion. The 	1
for the public safety. While one prince was set aside 	1
for the redress of grievances, to which no nation has 	1
for the regent's authority can, in no degree, be imputed 	1
for these, and I found this unpleasant task attended 	1
For these reasons I have, on the one hand, vindicated the earl of Murray 	1
For these reasons Mary laid aside, at that time, all 	1
for the subsistence of a few superannuated monks s , ap- 	1
for the whole island, and unfortunate to her alone. 	1
for this great, and, on his side, almost bloodless vie- 1568. 	1
for this purpose, and pleaded that lady Jane and him- 	1
For this reason, nothing could be more mortifying to 	1
For this reason they peremptorily denied Throkmor- 	1
for, though I have done all in my power to forward it, parti- 	1
fortified places, was then imperfectly understood in 	1
fortifying of Leith, and her other measures, which they 	1
fortifyLeith. sustained by the defection of the duke of Chatelherault. 	1
fortify them. The amorous turn of Francis the first 	1
forts in defence of its liberties, avails itself of every 	1
forts, of which the English troops had hitherto kept 	1
fortunate issue. Both Elizabeth and Mary continued, 	1
fortunate princes. 	1
fortunate. The earls of Northumberland and West- 	1
fortunate to those who, during the late commotions in 	1
fortune, and left open to every pretender the office of 	1
fortune. He studied, on the contrary, to display the 	1
fortune of James, that his maxims and manners were 	1
for various reasons. Morton was nearly allied to the 	1
for want of provisions, which the prospect of relief 	1
forward with him to the borough of Jedburgh, and there to remain during 	1
For what reason this plan, which by the foregoing 	1
foundation of their power. These considerations in- 	1
found Bothwell to be in no danger, she instantly returned ; and after this 	1
founded and enraged. But in the end Bothwell, partly 	1
founded, and urged with a zeal and unanimity, which it 	1
founded : Mary, the daughter of James the second, was married to James 	1
founded on circumstances peculiar to the persons who 	1
founded on the memory of past hostilities, and height- 	1
founded. Strong prejudices prevailed at that time 	1
founded. The genius of the feudal government was 	1
found guilty of treason ; but, through the queen's cle- 	1
found in their camp all sorts of provisions, at a cheaper 	1
found it easy to mingle with their countrymen, were at 	1
found means to defeat the effect of appeals, as well as 	1
found meditation, and, through the night, he was dis- 	1
found the door strongly barricaded ; and before it 	1
found them at the beginning of the conference. The 	1
Four of the deputies 8 happening to die before they 	1
Four re- The history of Scotland may properly be divided into 	1
four several times by their valour, and lost it as often 	1
framed all her actions to express such a prudent re- 	1
France . 	1
France ; and Baliol took possession of the throne. A 	1
France and England, emerged from her obscurity, took 	1
France and England; the latter, besides the ratifica- 	1
France ; and immediately conceived hopes of rendering 	1
France and power of their nobles. Men of genius then undertook, 	1
France, and took the government of the kingdom into 	1
France body of men, under the command of Leon Strozzi, to 	1
France, by recovering domestic tranquillity, would be 	1
France ; his condemnation could not fail of making the 	1
France, or, with difficulty, had recovered the ports of 	1
France, received orders to sail for Scotland, and a 	1
France, she put off the interview for that season 1 , and 	1
France, the connivance of the queen dowager, and the 	1
France, the protestants in the Low Countries, and for 	1
France, the scene of all these enjoyments, and contem- 	1
France. The situation of the English court may, in- 	1
France, to break their new confederacy with England, 	1
France to Scotland, the course lies along the English 	1
France, to take cognizance of this crime; and, by their 	1
France to the queen regent. That humane and saga- 	1
France, under pretence of visiting her daughter, and 	1
France would recover its former opulence ; and, though 	1
Francis encouraged and assisted the duke of Albany to 	1
Francis followed them implicitly in whatever track they 	1
Francis the first did not long survive a prince, who 	1
Francis the first, who mounted the throne of France 	1
Francis the second, a prince of a feeble constitution, 	1
frankly own that my pride is elated, as often as I find myself 	1
frayed the ordinary expense of government 8 . The 	1
freebooters were become no less intolerable to their 	1
freedom than they had hitherto enjoyed. Unsatisfied 	1
freeholders of eleven several counties, with all their 	1
French 	1
French affairs, were animated with the most virulent 	1
French ambassador, Courcelles: and that I should find all 	1
French and English troops. The former, trained to~~ 	1
French and Spanish ambassadors in her behalf, by re- 	1
French, but which soon inspired them with such ter- 	1
French councils to the highest degree. Ever since the 	1
French forces left Scotland, as much to their own satis- 	1
French garrison, rendered the progress of the English 	1
French king, continued a correspondence with Eng- 	1
French king willingly concurred in a measure, by which 	1
French ministers backward in encouraging Mary's pas- 	1
French pay, amounted at least to three thousand men, 	1
French princes, the same designs might be revived and 	1
French proposed to seize and fortify St. Andrew's, and 	1
French resident, mentions the king's absence, but without giving that rea- 	1
French secretary happening to return at that time into 	1
French soldier engaging in an idle quarrel with a citi- 	1
French title, together with a considerable pension, the 	1
French to overturn the settlement of the succession in 	1
French troops in the open field ; and were even unable 	1
French troops to the south side of the Forth ; and to 	1
French troops were to be employed, as instruments for 	1
French troops with the utmost coldness ; their disgust 	1
French were little able to keep the field against an 	1
frequency of public commotions, and the fierceness of 	1
frequently in the streets of Edinburgh, and excited 	1
frequent wars ; and allowed their fiery courage to eva- 	1
friar, named Black, had been slain at the same time with Rizio. Park- 	1
friend of mine, who is there, writes home to his father the 	1
friends, but renouncing, without reluctance, the tumult of 	1
friendship of Kirkaldy, governor of the castle, who, 	1
friendship of the earl of Murray, as a man devoted to 	1
friendship which I have long cultivated with equal satisfaction 	1
friends in that county; unprepared for a rebellion; 	1
friends of ^ rom verv different motives, was carrying on against 	1
friends was extreme, and inferior only in his liberality 	1
friends will be present, but we shall all lament your absence, 	1
friend, the reverend Dr. George Wishart, principal 	1
FROM 	1
from a desire of vindicating their civil liberties, than from any motive of 	1
from advancing, she empowered John Erskine of Dun, 	1
from a letter of Randolph's to Cecil, 10 Aug. 1560, printed in the appen- 	1
from all future fears. The expedient they had chosen 	1
from all future violation of religious houses ; and give 	1
from an eminence, they descried a powerful fleet steer- 	1
from any deliberate intention of ruining the family of Gordon ; and on the 	1
from assembling in any considerable body. All her 	1
from a thirst of vengeance, what formerly they would 	1
from attendance ; and the anxiety, with which our an- 	1
FROM BARON D'HOLBACH TO DR. ROBERTSON. 	1
from bearing the title of queen of England, in all times 	1
from being displeased at seeing the affairs of that king- 	1
from court, appeared there with little splendour, and 	1
from court. Roused, however, by an event no less 	1
from danger, but, within a few days, were in a condition 	1
FROM DR. BIRCH TO DR. ROBERTSON. 	1
from Edinburgh to Stirling, in order to visit the prince q^eeiTby 	1
from Elizabeth's disposition at that time, that she would 	1
from England k . 	1
from every maxim which her own wisdom or humanity 	1
from every quarter of the kingdom. Authorized by 	1
from expelling the invaders of their liberties, they be- 	1
from her an angry reply, which occasioned for some 	1
from her, to be void and of no obligation n . As it gives 	1
from him, and in return consecrate their lives to his 	1
from him. Darnly, Athol, Rizio, all the court favou- 	1
from him his crown. The history of Europe, during 	1
from his benefice was inconsiderable, not exceeding 	1
from his favour, would be willing to merit it, by pro- 	1
from impending destruction. But, in order to justify" 	1
from indulging their favourite passion, to render them 	1
from its gratification so much instruction may be gain- 	1
FROM MAJOR RENNELL TO DR. ROBERTSON. 	1
from manners you have drawn new resources for philo- 	1
from many dangers, and enduring much misery, he was, 	1
from many of the imperfections, which still adhered to 	1
from me in opinion. I mean not to take the field as a con- 	1
FROM MR. GIBBON TO DR. ROBERTSON. 	1
FROM MR. HUME TO DR. ROBERTSON. 	1
from Norfolk and Throkmorton, to the regent, and 	1
from obscure counts of Hapsbourg, to be archdukes of 	1
from pursuing slow and cautious measures ; they had 	1
from sect to sect, and even episcopal clergymen were 	1
from several circumstances that this short space was 	1
FROM SIR GILBERT ELLIOT TO DR. ROBERTSON. 	1
from so long a race of monarchs ? The principal au- 	1
from testifying their abhorrence of that religion which 	1
From that moment all hope of reconcilement was at an 	1
from that quarter. The success of their cause, as well 	1
from the apprehension of a match with any of the Aus- 	1
from the beginning of the reign of James the fifth to 	1
from the bustle of public business, to consecrate the 	1
from the censure which this conduct merited, and to 	1
from the church, but puritanic prejudice was yet too 	1
from the court, which sets her at her ease. She tells me, 	1
from the engagements which they had come under, 	1
from the former ; of the latter, many and striking proofs 	1
from the hands of sophists and declaimers. Lord 	1
from the inability of strangers to discharge these offices u np0 puUr 	1
from the interposition of the latter. Every considera- 	1
from their own conduct that Knox endeavoured to 	1
from the lord of Brinstone [i. e. Chrichton, laird of Brunstan] which I send 	1
from them no cordial or effectual service could be ex- 	1
from the nobles. Henry undermined his barons, by 	1
from the originals in the Cottonian library and paper 	1
from the pope, was Pelleve, bishop of Amiens, and 	1
from the printed histories of papers ; and nothing ever ap- 	1
from the queen herself, they addressed a remonstrance 	1
from the royal boroughs; from the four universities; 	1
from the sea, and from any English garrison, could not 	1
From these circumstances, notwithstanding the threat- 	1
From these motives she had acted, in granting the con- 	1
from the severest of the penalties enacted against them 	1
from the thoughts of foreign conquests, to defend the 	1
From the time of the queen's competition for the re- The regent 	1
From the time that Mary was put into their hands, it 	1
from this application to Mary ; and, therefore, at the beth. 	1
from this cruel mortification, he applied to Maitland, 1568. 	1
From this discourse it appears that at the very time 	1
From this period the history of Scotland would merit 	1
From this prospect and expectation of danger, the Scots 	1
from time to time. Meanwhile, Mary fixed her resi- king exces- 	1
from two of his own confidents, Carnegie of Kinnaird, 	1
from using the titles, or bearing the arms, o those 	1
from various quarters. Morton, Ruthven, Maitland, 	1
From whatever quarter information came, in whatever 	1
from your completing your work. As far as I can judge by 	1
froratjoch- towards the queen, when she recovered her liberty, in 	1
f Rymer, Feed. xv. p. 4. 	1
f Scots - estates' 1 . They imputed it not so much to any abhor- 	1
ful and insolent. In a meeting of the general assembly, 	1
ful associates were divided in opinion. Some advised 	1
ful, but firm ; and discovered a fixed resolution of con- 	1
ful chiefs, who were blindly followed by numerous de- 	1
ful intrigues, by which his ambassador endeavoured to 	1
full and distinct view of any important matter which ^^ e d d e " 	1
full of danger and of vicissitudes. His enjoyment of the 	1
full of the imaginary dangers with which that event 	1
Full of these ideas, he returned into his native country, 	1
full one, that only seven bishops and sixteen abbots were present. 	1
fully convinced that he was not only accessory to the 	1
fully gave these letters the air of being nothing more 	1
fully supported by those who had embraced their opi- 	1
ful, perhaps, than the wish to excel as a preacher : he 	1
ful than Somerset, conducted his measures with so much 	1
ful than themselves was a dangerous expedient. They The Scots 	1
ful, though often unfortunate, services seemed justly to 	1
funeral charges and debts, and distributing among his 	1
furnished him with every opportunity of giving correct 	1
furnished with a plausible reason for keeping her at a 	1
furnish proofs of indefatigable industry ; each of them 	1
further, and promised to Argyll, Glencairn, and the 	1
fury, and dragging the safeconduct, which the king 	1
fusal occasioned a delay. But, as every other cir- 	1
fused to concur in any design to favour the public 	1
fused to hearken to any proposal for dissolving their 	1
fuse to gratify the wishes of the whole nation, by dis- 	1
fusion and miseries of a civil war. The duke of Alva, 	1
fusion in which it has been hitherto involved. 	1
fusion, which the prospect of pillage or of massacre can 	1
future. 	1
future fame and success must rest, were sound and 	1
future proceedings of the commissioners . A protesta- 	1
G8 THE HISTORY BOOK r. 	1
gacity, foresaw all the effects of such a rash and angry 	1
gaged to second the queen in all her attempts to check 	1
gagements to that purpose, and in consequence of these 	1
gaging them in an inquiry after the authors of these 	1
gained on his vanity and inexperience. All Rizio's in- 	1
gained, or lost, by the first step one takes ; on all these 	1
gainers by matter to kindle zeal, than to extinguish avarice. Those 	1
gaining insensibly upon the nobles, recovered more 	1
gain. Many of the ancient dignitaries were men of 	1
gain or not ; and that Cadell and Miller got six thou- 	1
Gains the Encouraged by his success in gaining the regent, he 	1
gain whom, she employed every argument. But, what- 	1
galities.' The jurisdiction of the former was extensive; 	1
gance of Darnly's ambition gave rise to these. Instead 	1
garding the duty which they owed her as their queen, ~ 	1
gard to which he demanded to be resolved by Eliza- 	1
garet, queen of Scotland, he appointed the line of suc- 	1
garrison, despising their numerous but irregular forces, difficulties. 	1
garrisons were appointed by the war-office, and did not be- 	1
gates. At last he suffered her to conduct him into her 	1
gates of Edinburgh next morning to the queen regent ; 	1
gation apply * 	1
gation, was no longer remembered. 	1
gation with a powerful army, to render Scotland the 	1
gave great and just offence to the people, and consider- 	1
gave herself up entirely to such counsellors as complied 	1
gave him the command of all the south of Scotland. 	1
gave in an answer to the complaint which had been 	1
gave much umbrage to our kings, and contributed not 	1
gave offence to the French court, go far towards his 	1
geance which the resentment of the French court could 	1
gedy of Douglas : many of the author's friends among 	1
gence, anxiety, and dependence. 	1
gency were quickly felt. The party forming for the admhustra- 	1
gency with the duke of Chatelherault, the popish clergy, conduct^ 	1
genealogies, both genuine and fabulous, clanships were 	1
general, and the most inconsiderable states acquired 	1
general causes flowing from the nature of the feudal 	1
generally envelops the memory of ordinary men after 	1
general, so far alienated from the queen, and so much 	1
general system, of which every kingdom in Europe forms 	1
General The eyes of the neighbouring nations were fixed, at 	1
generous care of his education. During his long resi- 	1
generous man, who commanded an advanced body of 	1
genius and eloquence. I was afraid you might have been 	1
genius, and has the character of a very worthy man. My 	1
genius, and of a frail and sickly constitution, was not a 	1
genius appeared, and enabled him both to choose with 	1
genius did honour to the age, Maitland, and several 	1
genius of the ancient nobles ; too impatient to submit to 	1
genius of the French nation heightened this disgust, and 	1
genius of the government, was properly an assembly of 	1
genius of the reformation, all preeminence of order in 	1
gent and apparent necessity. They joined, with this Sept. 29. 	1
gent, and which it was impossible to conceal from the 	1
gent, by a sudden march to Edinburgh with a numerous 	1
gent?" ceremony was performed at Stirling, on the twenty- 	1
gent. England. He continued to foment the spirit of dis- 	1
gent for some time, and watched for an opportunity to 	1
gent in a measure so dishonourable to themselves, to 	1
gentle and humane, without weakness ; zealous for her 	1
gentleman, monsieur Helvetius, whose book, De 1'Esprit, 	1
gentleman of his retinue, despatched into his native 	1
gentleman, who yet, they say, has travelled. I wish they do 	1
gentlemen, it is probable that his disapprobation was 	1
gent retired into the castle of Edinburgh. Her health 	1
gent's clemency. But part of his estate had been be- 	1
gent's parliament in December. 	1
gent. The French king was ready to afford them his 	1
gent. This extraordinary sentence was owing no less to the 	1
gent. was lately dead ; and he began already to form a pro- 	1
gent. With regard to the queen's own person, nothing 	1
genuineness of Mary's letters to Bothwell, Appendix. 	1
geous situation, and elated with the hopes of fresh suc- 	1
ger. But, by marrying her to an Englishman, a zea- 	1
ger, in order to implore her immediate assistance r . 	1
gerous resentment of a powerful neighbour, the Scots 	1
gers, would have eagerly adopted the passions of their 	1
ger to which he must expose himself by such a violent 	1
gested the same thing . Deference to their opinion, 	1
gether. Almost all the passions which operate with 	1
gether, and established the protestant religion upon 	1
gether by the regent, put his booty on board the fleet, 	1
gether mysterious and unintelligible. By attending to 	1
gether with the alarm given him by the rumour of a 	1
gether with the queen. In consequence of this, the subjects took an oath 	1
gether with the terrour of the sentence of excommu- 	1
get into his hands the places of strength in the king- 	1
GG THE HISTORY BOOK i. 	1
gift was beyond her power, and that the authority of 	1
gilance and activity. In that warlike age, when all men 	1
GILB. ELLIOT. 	1
Giles in Edinburgh, which had remained, ever since 	1
ginal form ; while neither had recourse to that explica- 	1
gine that this can be agreeable to me ? And must not I be 	1
ginning of the present century, and while a treaty of 	1
ginning to be at home. It is probable that this place will be 	1
gins to dawn in the second period, with a light, feeble 	1
gion and the honour of its ministers ". 	1
gion ; its discipline had become corrupt and oppressive ; 	1
gion passed in the parliament held April, 1567." Goodall, ii. 357. The 	1
gion, their zeal for which had at first roused the 	1
gion which they had embraced, the Scottish nobles 	1
gious sentiments. Thus the protestants, instead of hold- 	1
give any plausible account, is discovered, by the queen's 	1
give credit to a suspicion, which received such strong 	1
given away, and the nobles so accustomed to independ- 	1
given credit to these suspicions. Melv. 127. Keith, Append. 123, 124. 	1
given her friends on the continent repeated assurances 	1
given to her commands'. 	1
given to popery in the British dominions ; I knew, that 	1
given to the conference at Westminster, and protested, 	1
given way to a torrent which she could not resist, ob- 	1
giving aid towards reducing to obedience their sedi- 	1
g Keith, 477. h Ibid. 481. 	1
g Keith, Append. 33. Knox, 222. 	1
Gladsmuir, 22nd Oct. 1753. 	1
Gladsmuir, 26th July, 1757. 	1
Gladsmuir to join the volunteers of Edinburgh : and 	1
glaring absurdities did not shock their gross under- 	1
Glasgow. By that time the violence of the distemper 	1
gle; and, had the archbishop of St. Andrew's been 	1
Glencairn arriving unexpectedly with a powerful rein- 	1
Glencairn, Home, Lindsay, Boyd, Murray of Tullibar- 	1
glory, and lovers of their king. To Charles, power was 	1
Goats 200 	1
go. Cecil, mentioning some scheme about the succession, if the queen 	1
God for her happy and gracious government, etc: and to effect that, the 	1
godmother to her son . 	1
gold, although the quantity of alloy was considerably increased, produced 	1
gone far towards extinguishing those jealousies which w j t h Mary. 	1
gone so far, that they were persuaded nothing less 	1
Good. 319. But, 1. No such thing is to be found among Bedford's in- 	1
good consequences. Vilmort was made comptroller, 	1
good effects, I supported it openly : when I foresaw 	1
good opinion of their countrymen, and to atone for the 	1
Good. vol. i. 266. 	1
Good. vol. i. 304, it would have been extremely improper to risk the 	1
good-will of Elizabeth, they foresaw clearly what would [567. 	1
good will towards the Scottish nation, and of respect 	1
Gordon was persuaded to do so; and being enjoined 	1
GO THE HISTORY BOOK i. 	1
gotiation, seem to have been sincerely desirous of re- 	1
gotiation with Norfolk had been discovered to Morton 	1
gotiation with the Scottish regent, however secretly 	1
gotten. In the confederacy between the king and the 	1
gour, and rose to a greater height than ever. 	1
gour. He possessed, in an eminent degree, the cha- 	1
gour of their resistance, no less than his unpopular 	1
govern- * conquer the world, many of the northern nations seem 	1
governed the court of France, was more decisive, and 	1
government. 	1
government ah 1 owed more full scope to the innovating 	1
government, has been able, in some parts of the king- 	1
government in that age; the low condition to which 	1
government n . The most ardent love of liberty accom- 	1
government of their native monarchs. 	1
government of the kingdom. On the other hand, the 	1
government, or with the title of king, which Mary, by 	1
governments feel sensibly the pernicious effects of a 	1
government should be vested in a council of twelve 	1
governments so feeble, men assumed, as in a state of 1566. 	1
government, the church, being reckoned a third estate, 	1
government; they allowed the prerogative to be en- 	1
government was left in the kingdom. Had they ad- 	1
governor the punishment which his insolence deserved. 	1
govern the kingdom by the advice of her nobles, they 	1
govern- was to be persuaded or forced to resign the crown ; the 	1
gow. It has been said that he was induced to make 	1
gracefulness of person ; and who excelled so eminently 	1
gradually rose upon the ruins of the monarchical. Lest 	1
grandeur, to which he attained by so many crimes, was 	1
grandize their own order, by depressing those who were 	1
grandson of him who stood in competition with Baliol, 	1
grandson of James the second. But Alexander lord 	1
Grange House, where he had the advantage of a purer 	1
granted during pleasure only, and kings were elective. 	1
grant. However great her surprise and indignation 	1
granting them possessions and immunities, which raised 	1
grapher, his conduct was guided by a mind superior to 	1
grasped at all the kingdoms of Europe, he employed 	1
gratify him, but avenge themselves, and hoped to ag- 	1
gratulate her safe return. Mary, that she might be 	1
Gray of Wilton, entered Scotland early in the spring, to Leith 	1
great advances. The cardinal observed its progress 	1
great advantage. His conquest of the queen's heart 	1
great advantage to the cause. To give a check to the 	1
great a favour. But my delay was only to render my 	1
great a proportion to the wealth of the kingdom, the 	1
great barons, of ecclesiastics, and a few representatives 	1
great care. 	1
great council,' by which parliaments were anciently dis- 	1
great degree, she determined to guard her more nar- 	1
great distance, and beheld all that passed in the field, 	1
great distance from each other, two envoys arrived from F e b. 3. 	1
great effects. Her subjects, unaccustomed so long to 	1
greater barons, from which the lesser barons were ex- 	1
greater distance from the enemy. In vain did the prior 	1
greater height. For this purpose they carried on their 	1
greater nobles and prelates, a considerable number of 	1
greater part of them was originally derived. The 	1
greater splendour than true glory; bustling, rather 	1
greater than the ill conduct of her generals in the 	1
greater union and vigour than formerly, and, behaving 	1
great esteem for it, but ' habent et sua fata libelli :' however, 	1
greatest power and credit among their countrymen. 	1
greatest strength in his dominions, but compelled him 	1
greatest strength in the kingdom ; and to acknow- 	1
greatest violence on a female mind, and drive it to the 	1
greatest wealth in the nation, and who never brought 	1
great friendship, was at that time in the middle of 	1
great importance. On the fourth of December died 	1
great imprudence in this unfortunate step. Mary was well acquainted with 	1
great instrument of dominion, a standing army, the au- 	1
great length, and placed in the strongest light. On all 	1
greatly altered. A great majority of abbots, priors, 	1
greatly diminished ; and not only were the present en- 	1
greatly exceeded the expectations I had formed, though I do 	1
great part of the ancient inhabitants, and, taking pos- 	1
great part of the temporalities of the church would 	1
great pleasure: I mean, she was sorry to finish it, but had 	1
great pomp; and for that purpose sent invitations of~ 	1
Great preparations had been made by Mary, and the 	1
great respect, etc. 	2
great revenues annexed to ecclesiastical dignities could 	1
great revolutions were carrying on in two kingdoms l}^^ 011 ' 	1
great satisfaction, and the infinite variety and compass 	1
great; such was the outcry of the enthusiasts that the 	1
great temper and address. Her brothers, in order to ofreg _ ent ' 	1
great triumph to the protestants, and encouraged them 	1
Greeks children in antiquities, we may well call them 	1
gree of credit is due to Knox and Buchanan, who ascribe it to the queen's 	1
gree, the ferocity of the nobles, and accustomed them 	1
gregation an early supply of money ; and from the same 	1
gregation. Princes seldom view their successors with- 	1
GREGATION, were alarmed, but not intimidated, by this 	1
gregatipn was uncertain, he assisted the queen regent 	1
gress into the northern parts of the kingdom. She was 	1
gret", At last a brisk gale arose, by the favour of 	1
grew insensibly to a degree of indignation that could 	1
grievances at her hands, but absolutely necessary to 	1
grossed the whole authority. He formed the ambitious 	1
ground, and, at that time, in an open field, had all the 	1
ground, both time and labour were lost. The inability 	1
groundless as the fears of the people might be, it was 	1
grounds -of great probability, that the match was wholly Elizabeth's own 	1
grounds, of the poverty and contempt under which the affairs. 	1
grown proprietors. But the power of an aristocracy 	1
guage. He complained of the injury done him, by 	1
guard against any breach of the order of succession. But the duke, not re- 	1
guards, received regular pay from the queen. This 	1
guided by obscure and often imaginary analogies. The 	1
guilt with the utmost confidence. But the known cha- 	1
guilty of great simplicity to contribute by my endeavours to 	1
guilty of this unpardonable transgression. The earl of 	1
guilty with vigour, and to bring them to a speedy trial ; 	1
guised his intentions, but, in defiance of the queen's 	1
guished by their great abilities, and no less by their 	1
guished by the name of ' lords of articles.' It was their 	1
guish, the dissensions and animosities among the Scots. tne regent. 	1
guish these quarrels ; and, by scattering or cherishing 	1
gular courage and conduct with which he put it in exe- 	1
gular government 2 . A licentious spirit, unacquainted 	1
gular institution, and the political use which our kings made of these. 	1
gular troops in constant pay. A fixed tax upon land, 	1
gument nor artifice, that could possibly recommend it. 	1
gument, or to reclaim her by indulgence, would have 	1
guns were already fired to welcome their friends, and 	1
gus, became master of the king's person, and governed 	1
gusts of faction he might have expected, he would 	1
gyll and Huntly, but made so deep an impression on 	1
H9 	1
habitants, they hoped to render it impossible ever to 1559. 	1
habituated to blood, not only in times of war, but of 	1
had already drawn the troops in French pay to Stirling ; 	1
had already offered the queen, there was none so effec- 	1
had amounted almost to certainty ; she blamed her for 	1
had appeared during the reign of James the fifth, were 	1
had a right to interpose ; and, therefore, by virtue of 	1
had attained the age generally deemed fit for enter- 	1
had attempted nothing contrary to the state of religion which she found 	1
had attempted to no purpose. Digges's Compl. Ambas. p. 13. A paper 	1
had been accustomed, no effectual remedy was pro- 	1
had been alternately his rival and his friend ; but his 	1
had been communicated to her, and every step towards 	1
had been proposed for the settlement of the nation. 	1
had been rash, and his despair upon a disappointment 	1
had called, they might be the better able to persuade 	1
had delayed for some time creating him duke of Al- 	1
had derived their credit, at first, from the authority of 	1
had determined never to ratify that treaty, took care 	1
Haddingtoun, a place which, on account of its distance 	1
had either taken arms, or so much as solicited her 	1
had embraced that doctrine, and to remove any dread 	1
had enjoined them to lay down their arms, they de- 	1
had excited a very general alarm: that the spirit of 	1
had excluded the descendants of his eldest sister, the 	1
had flattered herself with more gentle and brotherly 	1
had formed some particular system for depressing the 	1
had formerly neglected to mention in its proper place. 	1
had, from the beginning, discovered an inclination to- 	1
had gained in a skirmish, some days before, began the 	1
had given in answer to their remonstrance ; represented 	1
had good reason to despair, he expected to secure a 	1
had granted and violated, at a horse's tail, they march- 	1
had great reason to complain. She felt them with the 	1
had held ever since the time of his resigning the office 	1
had hitherto endeavoured to bridle the zeal of the re- 	1
had hitherto placed in him k . Her gratitude loaded 	1
had hitherto taken. Lord Erskine having pretended 	1
had influence enough to call in the aid of law. When 	1
had injured them, as a privilege of their order and a 	1
had in this country, and that he reckoned himself in the num- 	1
had its representatives in parliament; the number of 	1
had long been revolving in my mind, yet I had not been able 	1
had long been the object of his affections; with her 	1
had made in the year 1561, of her resolution to maintain that religion which 	1
had much to lose, and who could gain little, by closing 	1
had never once consented to hear any preacher of the 	1
had nothing to fear from the earl of Arran, who, hav- 	1
had not seasonably interposed, the rioters might have 	1
had obtained whatever they could demand for their fu- 	1
had often and plainly declared her resolution to marry. 	1
had paid any regard, this was one. She had confirmed 	1
had placed her love on a very unworthy object, who 	1
had polished the manners and humanized the minds of 	1
had presumed to rebel, and the Scots, in their turn, 	1
had projected his History of Scotland soon after his 	1
had raised them, in a short time, to an height of power, 	1
had raised, wasted the only kingdom which could pos- 	1
had recourse, as he projected, to the Scots; and at- 	1
had recourse to Elizabeth, from whose protection they 	1
had relied, were pronounced outlaws. By this ignohle artifice, so 	1
had rendered it impregnable. His retinue was nume- 	1
had seized the heir of the crown of Scotland, who was 	1
had so cruelly deprived him of a son, and her of an 	1
had so lately formed. War was determined, and or- 	1
had so little merited. But, instead of attempting to 	1
had so long subsisted between the two queens. The 	1
had soon another opportunity of discovering to the king 	1
had struggled and fought during so many ages. These 	1
had subsisted for some time between the two queens. 	1
had suffered, and receive from her those friendly offices 	1
had taken. 	1
had taken prior possession ; and I determined that my 	1
had taught ; others fled from the storm. To the greater 	1
had the chief direction of affairs during the minority of 	1
had the sole right of nominating the lords of articles n . 	1
had used with Maitland. He warned him of the dan- 	1
had ventured upon some steps more public and vigorous 	1
had warmly approved, I preferred the public good to 	1
had well begun to feel it. The French were, in that 	1
Hailes, which are appended to this narrative, that he 	1
Haines, Forbes, have drawn most of the papers which 	1
half. 	1
half of the national property had fallen into the hands 	1
halting, till they arrived at Stirling e . 	1
Hamilton. 	2
Hamilton, and they merit publication, as they exhibit a striking picture 	1
Hamilton of Bothwellhaugh was the person who but he is 	1
Hamiltons, applauded the enterprise. The maxims of 	1
Hamiltons had agreed to cement their new alliance 	1
Hamilton, suspicious of their designs upon the succes- 	1
Hamiltons were exposed, on the one flank, to a con- 	1
Hamilton, the first who suffered in Scotland for the 	1
Hamilton. There was little need of Mainland's address 	1
ham, one of his dependents. He excused his master's 	1
hand, a political observer would have predicted a very 	1
hand, a war with England, which he had reason to ap- 	1
h Anders, i. 89. ' Good. ii. 60. k Anders, i. 136. 	1
h Anders, vol. iii. 51. Camd. 420. 	1
hand. He was the third prince of the age in dignity 	1
hand, in which they warmly recommended the match, 	1
hand, offered her protection to several English fugi- 	1
hands and seals, afore they shall desire any supply or aid of money at your 	1
hands, and therewith in their left their bucklers, the one end of their pike 	1
hands, and to oblige her either to marry one of the 	1
hands. In a place of strength she was secured from 	1
hands. It is extremely probable, that our kings once 	1
hands. Nor would Elizabeth screen him from this, by 	1
hands of a man so remarkable both for his abilities 	1
hands of the conspirators, induced him to take arms, in 	1
hands, she was, at present, the object, not of fear, but 	1
hands. The same vast schemes of ambition, which 	1
hands. Though some of her subjects dreaded her re- 	1
hands, to play the same game of artifice and delay, 	1
hand. Suitable to this unfeeling and inflexible spirit 	1
hand, the bishop of Ross mentions the assassination of 	1
happens on the first publication of every new religion, 	1
happen to be taken prisoner. Besides these, the king 	1
Happily for him, his judges were not only zealous pro- 	1
Happily for the reformation, this spirit was still un- 	1
happiness of mankind, and so essential to Christianity, 	1
happy disposition, and prevailed on her, notwithstand- 	1
happy fate. " His death," says Drummond, " proveth 	1
haps, cause some surprise, particularly to those who are 	1
haps he expected nothing more than the comfort of 	1
haps of the greatest capacity who had ever held that 	1
haps, overturned from the foundation. These prudent 	1
haps, than any thing which he had hitherto performed, 	1
haps, to some of my readers, to know the subsequent variations in this sin- 	1
harassed and exhausted with fatigue r . 	1
harassed them with perpetual alarms, that they pre- 	1
hardly be restrained ; and, on occasion of a very slight 	1
hardly done justice to the savage character. 	1
hardly sensible of being, in any degree, subject to the 	1
has a title to exact. The same was the condition of 	1
has been drawn in such opposite colours. Personal 	1
has conferred upon him, the manner in which she suf- 	1
has inserted in the life of Johnson, Robertson stated 	1
hastening towards a crisis, depended entirely on the 	1
hastily assembled, and it was, probably, in the king's 	1
hath always attended every proposal for reformation, 	1
hath clothed, with all the beauties and graces of fiction, 	1
hath many parts; but, for my part, I have no skill but in plain song." 	1
hatred against the English nation. They openly called 	1
hatred. Elizabeth, with all those extraordinary quali- 	1
haughtiness and insolence became insupportable, and 	1
have absorbed the whole time ; but in the midst of so 	1
have added your history, which, I told him, was here pub- 	1
have afforded a good pretence for not visiting him sooner ; but Mary had 	1
have afforded her an opportunity of pursuing schemes 	1
have afforded them such assistance as might have en- 	1
have already observed, were frequently decided not by 	1
have a masculine succession. This matter is too big for weak folks, and too 	1
have an opportunity of considering the mode in which 	1
have appeared intolerable to men who received their 	1
have appeared odious and shocking. Remarks on the History of Scotland, 	1
have appeared to her rash and dangerous. 	1
have been acceptable to the king, and to his favourite ; 	1
have been brought to trial, but was saved by the~ 	1
have been checked, and Scotland brought to depend 	1
have been distributed amongst the protestant clergy, 	1
have been erected in the church of St. Giles, were already provided, 394. 	1
have been expected in an assignment which was made 	1
have been left altogether open and undecided ; and, by 	1
have been mingled (as is usual in relating extraordinary events) some cir- 	1
have been more acceptable to Elizabeth, who, by agree- 	1
have been perfectly safe. But the confederates had 	1
have been seized ; and the friendship of the king and 	1
have been seized elsewhere, without any difficulty, the 	1
have by him. In that condition I read it quite through with 	1
have ceased. He envied not their splendour, because 	1
have credited these professions f . But, instead of dis- 	1
have done in my review of that period, will be no restraint 	1
have employed philosophy to judge on manners, and 	1
have engaged Mary to listen to her proposal in favour 	1
have enjoyed and adorned private life ; but his public 	1
have ensured the safety and happiness of both. Zea- 	1
have entered on his course of academical study will, per- 	1
have extended not only to the doctrine, but to the form 	1
have fallen upon persons more acceptable to her peo- 	1
have followed. Keith, Pref. vii. 4. He informs his court, that on account 	1
have given rise to a long and doubtful litigation ; where 	1
have hindered her from choosing the earl of Leicester 	1
have hitherto proved fallacious. I confess, I thought 	1
have justly alarmed the nation. But at that time the 	1
have little reason to decline, or Elizabeth to urge, the 	1
have looked into it, and have made great discoveries. It will 	1
have made alterations and additions, which, I flatter 	1
have not at the same moment under our view : the very 	1
have not been, nor am I very forward in my specula- 	1
have now corrected ; but, after considering the act with particular atten- 	1
have obtained, would have added no little dignity to 	1
have produced good effects ; but now matters were 	1
have proved fatal to Mary's pretensions. Any sus- 	1
have put an end to the treaty, if the impatience of both 	1
have raised up against her many and dangerous ene- 	1
have reestablished the Roman catholic religion, and de- 	1
have rendered my Appendix equal in size to the most 	1
have restrained her from forming this union, which to her people must 	1
have said it of himself. As I must send off the preface by 	1
have the start of every other translator. My two volumes 	1
have transported her, at first, beyond the known pru- 	1
have ventured to come, had he harboured any sucli treasonable resolution. 	1
have weighed with indulgence the various obstacles of time 	1
having, about this time, openly espoused their princi- 	1
having been diligent in visiting the poor and afflicted, 	1
having been guilty of adultery. The influence of Both- 	1
having been purchased since his death by the lord 	1
having been so long delegated to regents. The ancient 	1
having by an artifice allured Maitland to Stirling, he 	1
having, by a new and solemn consecration, purified the 	1
Having deduced the history of the committee of lords of articles as low 	1
having him brought to a public trial, and prevailed, by 	1
Having hurried the Scots into this rash and fatal re- Mary sent to 	1
having joined them, with great multitudes of their fol- 	1
having married without a papal dispensation, their 	1
having recourse to the monarch, or acknowledging his 	1
having remonstrated with too much boldness against 	1
having sallied out with a strong body, they entered the 	1
having stooped so low as to court Rizio, that favourite, 	1
Haynes. 373, etc. 	1
Haynes, 449. 	1
Haynes, 484. Anders, vol. iv. 94. 	1
Haynes, 497. See Appendix, No. XXX. Good. vol. ii. 274. 301. 	1
Haynes, 525, 526. 530. 532. See Appendix, No. XXXIII. 	1
Haynes's State Papers, 43. 	1
hazarded a battle. To have retreated in the face of 	1
h Du Cange, voc. auxilium. 	1
h Du Cange, voc. placitum, col. 519. Magna Charta, art. 14. Act. 	1
head . 	1
he addressed to his desponding hearers an exhortation, 	1
head of the community and the supreme dispenser of 	1
head of the party. 	1
he adopted a plan extremely impolitic, and his reign 	1
headquarters of her foreign forces. This unpopular 	1
heads of this discourse are inserted in his history 1 , and 	1
head who was the undoubted representative of their 	1
He affirms, at the same time, that the subscriptions to this paper were ob- 	1
health began to decline, which until then had been 	1
healthful constitution. In conversation he was firm but 	1
he and his adherents were attainted, and, after escaping 	1
he applied himself to the clergy, hoping that they would 	1
he appoint to ^ jcr nom j n y o f the step which he was obliged to 	1
heard; hung up a black cloth behind him, that his 	1
hearken almost to any overtures. The confederates 	1
hearts of subjects with a bewitching insinuation. 	1
heart. The people themselves observed some parts of 	1
heart with calm and acute observation. Neither Knox 	1
heated by the part which they themselves had acted 	1
he at last accomplished. 	1
heavy cannon, nor with military stores, and little ac- 	1
he became the chief instrument of recovering her liberty, 	1
he bore the pangs of disorder with manly firmness, en- 	1
he, by his indecent behaviour, provoked the queen to 	1
he came abroad to commit a murder in the presence of 	1
he commanded his northern associates instantly to begin 	1
he communicated it to the-dtike' himself, and to the 	1
He communicated the design to the French ambas- His capri- 	1
he could allege in vindication of his proceedings against 	1
he could never expect favour, nor scarce hope for 	1
he could no longer bear advice, far less contradiction. 	1
he could not love her . . . : for he knew well she bore him no 	1
he could not reside there in safety ; and, flying first to 	1
he could venture to appear on the day prefixed. In 	1
he declared his own suspicion of Bothwell, and of those 	1
he delighted in war, and was eager to obtain fame. 	1
he determined that their consultations should not be carried on under the 	1
He endeavoured to lessen 'the obloquy, with which The regent 	1
he felt, in an high degree, all the passions which ani- 01 	1
he formed for that purpose was more profound, more 	1
He found them at Corichie, posted to great advantage; 	1
he gained nothing by this expedition; if the marriage 	1
he gave proof of his zeal in the support of the liberties, 	1
he had already obtained; and demanded their appro- 	1
He had always openly preferred a confederacy with 	1
he had been accused . 	1
he had been employed only to procure these for another. 	1
he had been seduced by the artifices of the queen to 	1
he had discovered himself to be so unworthy. Roused 	1
he had fallen, and, by exposing the queen's domestic 	1
he had held a close correspondence with the chiefs of 	1
he had hitherto regulated his conduct ; and, whether 	1
he had imagined, the English monarch began to treat 	1
he had much to dread from these; and, as he could 	1
he had now acknowledged was pleased to prescribe. 	1
he had perused them with great attention. 	1
he had prepared for the press, when he was prevented 	1
he had proposed was still in his view, he lost a great 	1
he had received, and from that moment he vowed to 	1
he had seen with his own eyes, before Foulnaye's departure 	1
He had very successfully made use of that nobleman to 	1
he hoped to bring Scotland entirely under manage- 	1
height; and the queen secretly fomented these with 	1
height, are often mortal ; and the known effects of dis- 	1
height of dignity of which he was altogether unworthy. 	1
height of favour, it is not probable she could think seri- 	1
he irritated the whole nation, by reviving the antiquated 	1
heir to the crown. 	1
heir to the queen, roused himself from his inactivity, 	1
He is de- pursuit. It was then that Murray gave proof, both of 	1
he is the sole proprietor of all the lands within his do- 	1
He lays it down as a principle, agreeable to the laws 	1
held in dependence, and obliged to court her. The 	1
held in the beginning of this year. Whatever regula- 	1
held its power in such extreme contempt, that he was 	1
held the balance with less delicacy, but with a stronger 	1
held their lands. They assembled accordingly; and 	1
held to be more sacred than any tie whatever, they 	1
held to be most reasonable, and proposed a method for 	1
held to be undoubted, might meet with formidable 	1
he led was not composed of soldiers, who could be 	1
He left a numerous family, which, by his own exer- 	1
he left the kingdom alarmed all ranks of men with the kingdom.' 	1
he lovt 1 his mother as much as nature and duty bound ; but 	1
he made to them in her behalf they either refused or 	1
he may find out the grocer, and trace the matter to the bot- 	1
he might have gained or softened many who had op- 	1
he must either have, obliged them to submit to the 	1
he must either have submitted to the conqueror, or have 	1
Hence arose the distinction between the ' greater' and 	1
henceforth all writs at law should run in the joint names 	1
henceforward, became known by its present name, which 	1
henceforward to carry herself both towards him and the queen 	1
Hence quarrels were transmitted from father to son, 	1
hended. Henry laboured to exclude the Scots from 	1
he neglected some advantages, which a more phlegma- 	1
He now began to make a figure in court, and to appear 	1
Henry could not have prescribed more ignominious 	1
Henry from carrying his arms into the continent. That 	1
Henry himself began his reign, by imitating the ex- 	1
Henry in- Henry was not of a temper to bear tamely the in- 	1
Henry, in order to gain the regent, had not spared 	1
Henry published a proclamation, disclaiming any know- 	1
Henry's l . Many of his own vassals, preferring their 	1
Henry's plan, would have been established by law ; a 	1
Henry that he did not load his rivals with any ground- 	1
Henry the second and the disgrace of his minister, the 	1
Henry the second, defended themselves not only with 	1
He observed the growing reputation and authority 	1
he observes, are the ancient and implacable enemies of 	1
he passed many years of domestic felicity. 	1
he prevailed on the king and queen to pass two nights 	1
he prevailed with lady Jane to apply to the protestant 	1
he produced a testament % which he himself had forged 	1
he publishes one sheet, to send it immediately a monsieur 	1
her 1 . 	1
her a decent excuse for her conduct; and while she 	1
her administration by conferring upon foreigners se- "^'her^d 	1
her administration, to accomplish such a desirable con- 	1
her advantage. In order, therefore, to prepossess the 	1
her affairs, could not long remain in force, entered into 	1
her age, could not help observing the change in her 	1
her ambassadors had all along carried on, with some 	1
her*; and, on the nineteenth of August, after an ab- 	1
her a pretence for rejecting it. She represented to 	1
her arrival in Scotland, the importance of the question 	1
her, as a rival by whom she was eclipsed. In judging 	1
her authority and entreaties, effected a reconcilement 	1
her, began to soften and to polish the rude manners of 	1
her being accessory to the murder of the king, and to 	1
her brothers and French counsellors with rashness and 	1
her charms, as a woman, and contracted many of those 	1
her claim to the crown of England, which was founded 	1
her claim upon the crown any farther than should be 	1
her command, and a numerous train of nobles at her 	1
Her com- Mary's commissioners expressed the utmost surprise 	1
her commissioners exempts them from the imputation 	1
her conduct. 	1
her counsellors, the question was not, what was most 	1
her counsels and advice, that he should content himself with 	1
her court ; but, finding her inexorable, they, with great 	1
her court was filled with a great and splendid train of 	1
her deliberations concerning it with the most anxious 	1
her disease. During the continuance of the queen's ill- 	1
her displeasure; some who faithfully adhered to her 	1
her dissatisfaction with the step which Mary proposed 	1
her domestics the undisturbed exercise of the catholic 	1
here. 	1
hereafter introduced into the kingdom, without the 	1
He received, at the same time, a more real accession to 	1
he received to distrust the queen's artifices, she prevailed 	1
hereditary, and added new lustre to nobles already in 	1
hereditary. The lands of some were, in process of 	1
hered to France. 	1
hered to the queen with any firmness, it is probable, 	1
he reigned in a kingdom more civilized; his love of 	1
herents. event so contrary to their expectations, and so fatal to 	1
herents from different parts of the kingdom. He was 	1
herents in Scotland to arms, by imputing such designs 	1
herents were alarmed, and Argyll and Huntly, whom 	1
herents, which had been suspended, in expectation against him. 	1
He represented once more the indecency of allowing 	1
he represented x . 	1
he resided in England, had been accustomed to some 	1
He resolved, therefore, to disappoint the effects of their 	1
heresy. Courts were erected in different parts of 	1
her factious nobles. The report of the manner and 	1
her fears, than that they betrayed her into dissimu- 	1
Her first step towards the execution of her new scheme, 	1
her for a man whom she had chosen to be the husband of a 	1
her former authority ; or be admitted to reign jointly 	1
her former husband to that honour. She agreed, how- 	1
her former offer, was, on that account, not a little per- 	1
her from this danger, which she determined to guard 	1
Her gentleness and humanity had removed many of 	1
her government, either give her the assistance which 	1
her grateful sense of his paternal care and liberality, 	1
her heart, as well as over her councils, was more visible 	1
her heart. But at what precise time this ambitious 	1
her heart, which encouraged his enterprising genius 	1
her husband's quarrel, was extremely solicitous to se- 	1
her immediately to her own throne, but in securing 	1
her, in a particular manner, dread their neighbour- 	1
her in such terms, as if the presumptions of her guilt 	1
her interest would permit her to take such a step. The 	1
her knowledge could hardly be reckoned criminal; 	1
her late imprisonment was still lively, and the terrour 	1
her letters to the Scottish queen. She now wrote to 	1
her liberty, or of her life, had fled from their violence, 	1
her lieutenant-general in Scotland, together with the 	1
her misfortunes, should recover her ancient authority, 	1
her ' my daughter,' are still extant. Keith, p. 42. 	1
her native country, and to assume the reins of govern- Scotland. 	1
her native kingdom. 	1
her next evening, under a strong guard, to the castle 	1
her no reason to distrust his vigilance or fidelity, yet, 	1
her, not only with respect, but with affection. This 	1
her other attendants, who conjured her, even on their 	1
her own and of her mother's sufferings, with which she 	1
her own choice, and the king's ingratitude and obsti- 	1
her own conduct by the situation of her adversaries, 	1
her own hand to her ambassador in France, on the day 	1
her own interest might soon efface the memory of her 	1
her own pretensions to the English crown. Nor was 	1
her own strength. While the queen was in this pros- 	1
her own subjects, were the real motives of this delay. 	1
Her party in Scotland was numerous and powerful. 	1
her passions impetuous, was so elevated by her sudden 	1
her past misfortunes had not been able entirely to sub- 	1
her people, seems to be beyond all doubt. Francis the 	1
her power, in ordering them to be kept in custody, was 	1
her presence, expressed the utmost indignation at his defeats it. 	1
her presence : they enjoyed full liberty; she languished 	1
her presence, while she lay under the infamy of such a 	1
her pretensions to that crown. The rumour of her 	1
her promise, and even proclamations to the contrary, 	1
her real condition was that of a prisoner. Mary knew 	1
her resolution never to marry. Notwithstanding Eli- 	1
Her return, even without any support from England, 	1
her return into Scotland. But, in an age accustomed 	1
Herries accompanied the regent to Stirling, and visited ~ 	1
Herries. He could not well be mistaken with regard to what himself did. 	1
Herries is one of the nobles who subscribed the bond, April 19. Keith, 383. 	1
her right from such authority. Like him, she observed 	1
her right of succession to the crown of England were 	1
her rival, began to lay aside the expressions of friend- 	1
her safest and most inoffensive choice q . An advice, 	1
herself. But her affection toward him still continuing 	1
herself entirely to despair l . This interview, from which 	1
herself, he said, no longer admitted him into any confi- 	1
herself to be completely in Elizabeth's power, and, 	1
herself to the protection of lord Erskine. This noble- 	1
herself was deeply tinctured with all the prejudices of 	1
herself with so much moderation, and deference to the 	1
herself would be extremely solicitous to discover those 	1
her sentiments would intimidate Mary, who was hardly 	1
her solicitude to display her charms, her love of flattery, 	1
her so many abetters, her own personal influence was 	1
her son. Bedford was attended by a numerous and 	1
her son. Bothwell had now brought his schemes to force to 	1
her sorrow, and give vent to her tears x . The king still 	1
her station in the system, and began to have some in- 	1
her stay at Glasgow, and fully lay open this scene of 	1
her subjects. Many of the nobles she won by her ad- 	1
her subsequent, conduct towards Mary, we must not 	1
her sufferings, by the admiration and pity which they 	1
her. Throkmorton, though disposed, as well by his 	1
her throne. 	1
her to court them by every art ; and rather to employ 	1
her to death. Elizabeth there offers to regent Mar, to de- 	1
her to perpetual imprisonment. Whatever right a free 	1
her to prefer it before her own palace of Holyrood 	1
her to the palace of Holyrood-house with little pomp. 	1
her troops. In order to deprive him of this aid, Henry 	1
her vicechamberlain, to the queen of Scots, with let- 	1
her views, and to proceed with caution ; and, whatever 	1
Her virtue was not more proof than that of Henry had 	1
her voyage. 	1
her way to the highest station in the kingdom ; and many 	1
her wishes. Thus, with their own approbation, a wo- 	1
her with a disgustful reserve; though she kept her, m&lt; 	1
her with a very different face of things. The impa- 	1
her wonted artifices were now of no avail; repeated 	1
He seemed, at first, unwilling to accept the office of 	1
He seems, however, to have expected little success ^j? u ^P 	1
hesitated for some time, and determined to advance 	1
he soon became disgusted with the indolence and re- 	1
he soon gathered such strength, that he ventured to 	1
he thought it improper to assume any thing of the formal 	1
He threatened vengeance, but was unable to execute 	1
He took his stand in a wooden gallery, which had a 	1
he took them all under his own roof at Gladsmuir, and 	1
he was afterwards to take in the ecclesiastical policy of 	1
he was appointed chaplain of Stirling castle; in 1761, 	1
he was attached by long and intimate acquaintance, 	1
he was bound to be the guardian. The lord Ruthven, 	1
he was commanded to prevent it by every act of hos- 	1
he was equally formidable to both. Henry was afraid 	1
he was licensed to preach by the presbytery of Dal- 	1
He was looked up to as the man destined by provi- 	1
he was raised ; and to be content with the second place, 	1
he was sensible this action would be attended, by pro- queerTof * 	1
He was the natural son of James the fifth, by a daugh- 	1
he would be willing to put the prince into the hands of 	1
hibiting the parliament to meet on the day appointed ; 	1
hide himself in some retirement, or to appear in a man- 	1
hid her indignation. Even the princes of Lorrain were 1560. 	1
hiding the disgrace, under which he was now fallen, 	1
h Id. vol. iv. part ii. 99. ' l Melv. 191. 	1
high chancellor of the kingdom, undertook to direct an 	1
highest indignation, that the Scots beheld offices of 	1
high steward, high constable, earl marshal, and high 	1
high to allow them to listen to any pacific proposi- 	1
him all the powers and privileges of that high office. 	1
him a man, whose views were so contrary to his own, 	1
him, and he seemed even to have regained his brother's 	1
him ; and in concluding a peace, instead of giving the 	1
him and lord Herries prisoners to the castle of Edin- 	1
him, and then to the prior of St. Andrew's, that, in 	1
him and the queen of Scots. 	1
him any favour ; but I shall call on Pryce Campbell, though 	1
him at the place of her residence 8 . Lesley endeavoured 	1
him, because he divided with them the power and emo- 	1
him, both his daughters had been declared illegitimate ~ 	1
him. But the prior of St. Andrew's, and other leaders 	1
him by his father: farther, that he had seen other letters 	1
him by our historians. His neglect of the nobles ir- 	1
him from knowing too much. The earl of Angus, in 	1
him, he demanded the crown matrimonial with most 	1
him, in her name, that, on one hand, nothing had been 	1
him in the way of great civil employments ; his abilities 	1
him into all her councils, and allowed a person, uni- 	1
him ; many ages elapsed even before a guard was ap- 	1
him mumble something, which, though he had forgot in the 	1
him no encouragement to proceed. The same reason would 	1
him, now and then, to conclude the proposal of his 	1
him of reason, and at last he ended his days, unpitied 	1
him of the possession of his private fortune. The car- 	1
him persons capable of directing his conduct, could not 	1
himself. 	1
himself, and which would have established the gran- 	1
himself at liberty to think of adding to his own comfort 	1
himself been within the walls of a theatre, being re- 	1
himself by the same means which his adversaries em- 	1
himself, he suffered, at once, the miseries of infamy 	1
himself in architecture, music, and other arts, which 	1
himself the wisest prince in Europe, he was a constant 	1
himself to be the author of the enterprise, and to pro- 	1
himself unable to revenge them. The deepest melan- 	1
himself who intended to write it ; but he has not wrote it, 	1
him several marks of distinction during his residence in France. Hard- 	1
him such an accession of dignity and power, as no man 	1
him, than rage and indignation occasioned an universal 	1
him. The jury, under these circumstances, could do 	1
him the most important employments, and manifested 	1
him. The obligations, however, which Murray lay under 	1
him the title of earl of Murray, with the estate annexed 	1
him to abolish the power, and his covetousness to seize 	1
him to accuse the queen. She considered of the most 	1
him. To attack him in Aberdeenshire, the seat of his power, and in the 	1
him, to be sure, on the fate of his new boasted historian of 	1
him to deliberate any longer. Under pretence of an 	1
him to depend on his barons ; an army could not be 	1
him to escape the fury of the rioters; for when the 	1
him to great honours ; but, with regard to Mary's title 	1
him to higher honours f . 	1
him to pursue his journey any farther. '. * :. 	1
him to retire, without loss of time, to Stirling. The 	1
him, which she was at no pains to conceal 1 , might in- 	1
him ; who considered the right of punishing those who 	1
him with fear, by magnifying the danger to which he 	1
him with little respect. The young queen was now in 	1
him with marks of her bounty ; she raised him to offices 	1
him without being absent from her son p . The king 	1
him with the most zealous protestants. Several of the 	1
hind her in tranquillity, she, with an army eighteen 	1
his abilities were great, did not possess the talents re- 	1
his absence from the baptism, and his account of this matter is that which I 	1
His accession to the throne of England united the two 	1
his accusation. In his name appeared Robert Cunning- 	1
his administration was extremely popular, and he was 	1
his ambassador at the French court to solicit the princes 	1
his ancient friends stood at a distance, and predicted 	1
his approaching fall. But amidst the turbulence and 	1
His army was soon ready to invade the kingdom. James 	1
his arrival at York, which explains this mystery, 	1
his attendance expired, he still retained authority, to 	1
his attention to a course of practical elocution. For 	1
his authority with them, he could put a negative upon 	1
his avowed enemies, as a more certain indication than 	1
his avowed enemy, who had been accused of a design 	1
his body with fifty-six wounds p . 	1
his brother maintained his station with that address 	1
Hischarac- There is no person in that age about whom his- 	1
Hischa- Such was the unhappy fate of Henry Stewart lord 	1
his civil jurisdiction almost nothing 6 . The army which 	1
his commission with such vigour and prudence, as ac- 	1
his conduct, nor signified any intention of altering it. 	1
hisconduct; .., T ,, . 	1
his conduct, which little suited the dignity of a king. 	1
his consent to a voluntary surrender of the supreme 	1
his country. But, instead of any hopes of reigning in 	1
his courage, and the spirit of chivalry, rather than the 	1
his credit to dissuade his countrymen from this mea- 	1
His death was fatal to the catholic religion, and to The regent 	1
his destruction; and he imputed it to the malice of 	1
his discourse, and informed me that I had been long and im- 	1
his domestic government, and must have greatly facili- 	1
His early application to public business kept him un- 	1
his eloquence and taste as a preacher; and, if we may 	1
his eloquence ; he defended Home, as a friend to whom 	1
his enemies allow him to have possessed in an eminent 	1
his enemies, to make them sensible of their own strength, 	1
his equals, especially after his elevation to the regency, 	1
his faithful services, felt a passion of another nature 	1
his father or grandfather to humble the nobility ; but, 	1
his favour ; and, at the same time, Mary conferred upon 	1
his favour with such general consent, that the artifices 	1
his first performance. The time I have employed, and 	1
his follies and vices with its friendly veil, they appeared 	1
his followers were no less willing to accept a pardon on 	1
his former letters, though under expressions the most 	1
his former station, which must needs prove fatal to 	1
his friends and dependents, and surrounded it with 	1
his goods, and to a corporal punishment, at the discre- 	1
his grandfather ; he pursued them with that ohstinate 	1
his house, and turned out his wife naked, in a cold 	1
his house, but to get the person of the queen into his 	1
his importunity, to have a day fixed for it. Bothwell 	1
his influence a . The interposition of sir Nicholas Throk- 	1
his interest, had so ungenerously purchased the earl of 	1
his interest in the kingdom to be less considerable than 	1
his interest or his fame, or even his safety, he would 	1
his lands restored by Robert, duke of Albany. James, 	1
his last moments, neither he himself, nor the ministers 	1
his liberty, not only extorted from him an exorbitant 	1
his love of retirement, lived at a distance from court, 	1
his master, which his great experience, and his faith- 	1
his means, chiefly, this change in the system of national 	1
his memory have been forgotten ; but the cruel circum- 	1
his mind to have been raised to an high strain, and 	1
his ministers were saved by this accident, the nobles 	1
his minority. Combinations among themselves, secret 	1
his mother and grandmother, would be deemed incon- 	1
his name, was upon the point of experiencing the vi- 	1
his native country, to resign the highest office, and 	1
his natural daughter with the earl of Crawfurd's son d ; 	1
his new acquisition. Six thousand veteran soldiers, 	1
his niece, the lady Margaret Douglas. * This unhappy 	1
his nobles is able to perform. Though the ardour of 	1
his office; and, having been intrusted by parliament 	1
his operations with much prudence. He was in friend- 	1
his other subjects ; not a single man received pay from 	1
his own country, and enjoyed an honourable station in 	1
his own country, was preferred by her to that office. 	1
his own hands. But nobles, who were thus wasting 	1
his own honour, and the independence of his country, 	1
his own zeal for the popish religion seemed to give him 	1
his papers, is here added. 	1
his parliament before debate, as well as after it; and, 	1
his party, and seems not to have had the most distant 	1
his perfidiousness ; and all of them despised the weak- 	1
his person. James was continually surrounded by the 	1
his plan the transactions of all the European nations in 	1
his posterity have held the sceptre in two kingdoms, 	1
his power with moderation, equal to the prudence by 	1
his prerogative, and which had been extorted during 	1
his presence suspended its effects for some time. The 	1
his principal officers. As the common safety required 	1
his profession. * * 	1
his proposals were rejected with the scorn which the 	1
his protection, his familiarity, and even his smiles, con- 	1
Hispru- friends, and inspire his enemies with boldness. In such 	1
his public life is of too memorable a nature to be passed 	1
his rage time to subside, and had again joined the queen when she was 	1
his request. 	1
his resentment. Amidst the agitations of so many vio- 	1
his resentment and indignation. Angus foresaw that 	1
his resentment, which scrupled at no violence, and the manners of the age, 	1
his respectful behaviour since that time had not only 	1
his schemes successful; and, instead of perishing be- 	1
his schemes with full effect, kept him in continual indi- 	1
his son, Edward the sixth, conducted themselves, with 	1
his sovereign. 	2
his sovereign ; or when Mary, instead of gratitude for 	1
his sovereign was examined with attention. In parti- 	1
his standard f . These conquered not for their leader, 	1
his strength, by the arrival of Matthew Stewart, earl of 	1
his style, his history might be placed on a level with 	1
his subsistence on the friendship of the king of Eng- 	1
his temper preserved him from the latter. Timidity 	1
his temper would have engaged him openly to attack 	1
his third son, and lord Ogilvie, had a dispute about the 1562. 	1
historians, and which they have neglected to explain q . 	1
historians do not mention. During his residence there, 	1
historians, must be considered as flowing entirely from 	1
historians. The English made some amends for their 	1
historiographer for Scotland was revived in his favour; 	1
history. But what is more curious ; when I was carried 	1
history had been finished, it would have furnished you with 	1
history of a nation, than an acquaintance with its pecu- 	1
History of Charles the fifth, which is so intimately con- 	1
History of England, but to this proposal he would not 	1
History of England by your pen. His lordship assured 	1
history of modern Europe ; and the events of the last 	1
HISTORY OF SCOTLAND 	1
HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. 	5
History of Scotland. During that time I have been 	1
History of Scotland. I propose to myself great plea- 	1
History of the Reformation, vol. iii. 281, and published by him, Appendix, 	1
history, particularly that of Greece ? I think Rollin's suc- 	1
history ; the partial testimony of ignorant chroniclers ; 	1
history till I should write to you, and give you an opportunity 	1
history to descend from its dignity, and to record his 	1
history. Whatever may be the inconstancy of taste or fashion, 	1
history, which has hitherto been destitute of both, and a 	1
history ; whilst I keep the side-path of geography. Since I 	1
his tragical end, was already formed ; and, while he 	1
His vigor- The regent did not give him time to form his party 	1
His virtues were severe ; and his deportment towards 	1
his warm remonstrances against the violent measures 	1
his way a rival, who had not only eclipsed his great- 	1
his will, than his own privy council ; and, by means of 	1
his youth. Lord Gordon, who had been privy to his 	1
hitherto advanced, he ventured upon a measure that 	1
hitherto amused by Bothwell's artifices, or intimidated 	1
hitherto, consisted, though proper enough for the short 	1
hitherto endeavoured to destroy it. 	1
hitherto met with, and the many contrivances employed 	1
hitherto wasted her strength, in the quarrels between 	1
h Keith, p. 84. 	1
h Knox, 319. ' Keith, 230. 	1
hold!" Even when the darkness of the night had hid 	1
holding of the emperor. They possess all the feudal privileges ; their fiefs 	1
holding vast possessions of the crown, were deemed 	1
hold the French power daily increasing, and must, at 	1
holy; and, on both these accounts, she determined to 	1
Home, the most eminent of all the Scottish peers who 	1
homicidia, depraedationes, incendia, et caetera maleficia remanserunt im- 	1
Hommil a tailor, Leonard a smith, Rogers a musician, 	1
honest pleasure which I received from your obliging 	1
honourable spies, authorized by the mutual jealousy of 	1
honour and dignity of the French crown ; and, instead 	1
honour, and so fatal to her peace. This strange coali- 	1
honour, as he attributes it to the disposition shown in 	1
honour, intended to ruin him in the good opinion both 	1
honour of entering the lists against him. But this 	1
honour of his country. The nobles, ashamed of their 	1
honour of their country m . 	1
honours, and benefices, were taken under public pro- 	1
honour to the industry and penetration of that great 	1
hood, she instructed Randolph to remonstrate, in the 	1
hood with new possessions. The riches of the church 	1
hoped, by his dexterity and talents, to render himself 	1
hoped to keep the negotiation entirely in her own 	1
hoped to put an end to the war before the arrival of 	1
hoped to rouse the English catholics, formidable, at 	1
hope for from the favour of ministers, I must patiently ex- 	1
hopes. All the nobles of England concurred, said 	1
hopes that the presence of the first nobleman in the 	1
hoping that the reverence due to her person might 	1
horribles qui me font craindre de perdre entierement 	1
horrid as the murder of her husband, their mistress, to 	1
horrour; and reformation never proceeds from them- 	1
horse, they infested the French with continual incur- 	1
horse, which stood ready for him at a back-passage, 	1
Hospitals 3 	1
hostilities. Contrary to the orders of the Scottish ge- 	1
hours. This tedious siege was concluded by a truce. 	1
house. 	1
house, and keepeth watch therefore nightly, hath sent to me sundry times, 	1
house. Her aversion for the king grew every day more 	1
house in Edinburgh, whither he had come in order to 	1
house of commons refused to indulge the wife of their 	1
house of Hamilton reckoned Murray's promotion an 	1
houses and as many towns and villages about Edinburgh as ye may con- 	1
houses ; and James the first, who was fond ofimitating the English in all 	1
house, they found it defended by a military force, which 	1
hoved him to think of his own affairs, and that he thought 	1
How absurd soever and ill-founded the speculative 	1
however, by seizing the person of the young king, and 	1
however, could not bear with patience such a cruel 	1
however, depended entirely on the crown. The popes, 	1
however, gained little by this act of treachery, which 	1
however, must be numbered among those blemishes 	1
however, often surmounted by love ; and Leicester 	1
however, perfectly suitable to Elizabeth's general sys- 	1
however, that the preservation of the protestant reli-~ 	1
however, the confederates attempted, and they did not 	1
however, the honour of the church, the importunity of 	1
however, though comparatively great, were in reality 	1
however, to act with equal dissimulation. The former, 	1
however, to leave the kingdom, and to reside for some 	1
however, which had risen to such an height in the late 	1
how humbling and disrespectful Elizabeth's proposal 	1
how improper it would be for him to appear as the 	1
how naturally these prompted them to act with so much 	1
how open her reputation lay to censure, while she suf- 	1
h See Appendix, No. XIV. ' Keith, 326. 	1
h See Append. No. I. 	1
h Spotswood, 158. 	1
h The enterprising spirit of Bothwell was so conspicuous as to procure 	1
h The resentment of the nation against the French rose to such an height, 	1
human mind, without pretending to justify, or even to 156$. 	1
human prudence and invention would utterly despair". 	1
humble form of a supplication or address, the parlia- 	1
Hume. I shall tell you in a few weeks which of these heroes 	1
Hume, two names which friendship united, and which 	1
Hume was, it seems, favoured with the sheets of the 	1
Hume, with whom, notwithstanding the contrariety of 	1
humorously called it, disgusted the whole nation ; their 	1
hundred merks were granted s . About twenty-four thou- 1561. 	1
Hunted from place to place, deserted by his friends, 	1
Huntly and Seaton, who were privy to all Bothwell's 	1
Huntly might have indulged the most elevated hopes. 	1
Huntly's jealousy, to offend his pride, and to inflame 	1
Huntly 's orders, shut the gates against her. Mary was 	1
hurrying on the trial with such illegal precipitation. 	1
hurst, bishop' of Norwich, in communicating this intelligence to his corre- 	1
hurting each other. 	1
husband. ,11 	1
husband . At his age, and in such circumstances, it I56a. 	1
husband by a day appointed. At the same time she 	1
husband. He urged her to prosecute those who were 	1
hypocrisy can fully cover them from observation. There is 	1
i 	1
i. 174. But with regard to every point relating to the succession, Elizabeth 	1
I. 1. This is positively asserted by Buchanan, 341. 2. The English re- 	1
i After their fruitless consultation in Stirling, the lords retired to their 	1
I am, dear sir, with the highest regard, 	1
I am, etc. 	2
I am indebted to the accuracy of sir David Dalrymple, for pointing 	1
I am, my dear sir, 	1
I am nearly printed out, and shall be sure to send you a 	1
I am now in the twenty-eighth year of my authorship, and 	1
I. Among nobles of a fierce courage, and of unpo- Encourage 	1
I am sincerely yours, usque ad aras, 	1
I am sorry, on many accounts, that you did not see this 	1
i Anders, vol. iv. 153. See Appendix, No. XXIV. 	1
i Anders, vol. iv. part i. 102. * Cald. vol. ii. 99. 	1
i Anders, vol. iv. part ii. 170, etc. 	1
I beg you to indulge my curiosity by informing me of them. 	1
Ibid. 178. 	1
Ibid. 210. 	1
Ibid. 283. Cabbala, 157. 	1
i Burn. Hist. Ref. i. 338. 	1
I could not deny myself the satisfaction (which I hope 	1
I could persuade you to change the narration of the text, that 	1
I could receive the favour of an answer) I shall begin my 	1
idea of much activity, announced vigour of body and a 	1
ideas, consonant to the principles of her religion, the marriage of Bothwell 	1
ideas predominated, military subordination was esta- 	1
ideas were just and well-founded, I adhere to them ; 	1
I DELIVER this book to the world with all the diffi- 	1
I desire my compliments to lord Elibank. I hope his lord- 	1
I desire you to make my compliments acceptable to sir 	1
Id. ibid. 122. 	1
Id. ibid. 133. 158, etc. 	1
If any of these crimes should be denied, an offer was 	1
If either of these conspiracies had taken effect, this 	1
I find you prognosticate a very short date to my adminis- 	1
I FORGOT to tell you, that two days ago I was in the house 	1
if she complied with the latter request, no title to the 	1
if she could have represented the consent of the nobles to have been their 	1
If the evidence of his guilt did not amount to a full 	1
If the reformers had been allowed to act without 	1
If the second volume of the State Papers of lord Burghley, 	1
If they had allowed the crown to seize the spoils of 	1
if this check should be removed by the legal acknow- 	1
If we consider how seldom any solid advantage is pro- 	1
if you want a little flattery to the author, (which I own is 	1
ignominious station of a dependent province ; and, in 	1
ignominy of a flight, and would, at once, dispirit his 	1
ignorant ; and as the boldness and despair of the con- 	1
ignorant of the jealousy and fear with which Elizabeth 	1
I had both very tempting offers from booksellers, and 	1
I had erred, either in relating events, or in delineating 	1
I have added a ' Critical dissertation concerning the 	1
I have already despatched to Lausanne, two immense cases 	1
I have already related, and owed his life to the re- 	1
I have attended to the notes in Bannatyne's poems. I have 	1
I have consulted all these papers, as far as I thought 	1
I have desired Cadell to despatch, for the use of my two Edin- 	1
I have done it since. I am now enabled to thank you, 	1
I have employed them to confirm what was already 	1
I have got a good reason or pretence for excusing me to 	1
I have here met with a prodigious historical curiosity, the 	1
I have, however, suffered my gratitude to lie under 	1
I have seen a copy of your history with Charles Stanhope. 	1
I have seen enough to convince me that the present 	1
I have taken care to word it so modestly that a man might 	1
I have the honour to be, 	1
I have the honour to be, etc. 	1
I have written, by materials and facts which I have disco- 	1
II. As the administration of justice is one of the most Extend the 	1
i Idem, vol. iv. 8. 55. 	1
i i i * i i i favour of 	1
III. The division of the country into clans had no The institu- 	1
I i j * 	1
i . i_ . j. ~ ii&gt; i ' . tions in that 	1
I imagine, to throw light on several events which have been 	1
I informed them, that the design of extending the re- 	1
I. It cannot well be conceived, that the queen's journey to the north 	1
II. That Murray and his associates had resolved to seize Darnly in his 	1
ii THE LIFE OF 	1
i i / tlon&gt; 	1
II. To suppose that the earl of Huntly had laid any plan for seizing the 	1
IK 	1
i Keith, 398. r Anders, vol. i. 128. Keith, 401. 	1
i Keith, 507. Spotsw. 175. 	1
i Keith, 98. Maitland, Hist, of Edinb. 16, 17. 	1
i Keith, Appenth 135. r Keith, 561, 562. Knox, 401. 	1
i Knox, 193. 	1
i k Vihteitt 	1
I likewise received from him the original register of 	1
Ill con- 	1
illegal and null, the other pronounced a sentence of 	1
ill-founded their apprehensions might be, some conces- 	1
ill-informed and credulous annalists. The Scots, if we 	1
ill obeyed, and her manifesto met with little credit p . 	1
illustrious a benefactress inspired him with uncommon 	1
illustrious competitors for the crown, appeared. Bruce 	1
I looked with great impatience in your new edition for the 	1
ily sorry that we are now supplying you with that kind 	1
I made upon the frequency of assassination in that age, and the slight opi- 	1
imagination engaged him in those chimerical sciences, 	1
imagination of the earl of Arran, it is impossible, amidst 	1
imagined to be due to himself, as first prince of the 	1
imagining that they were tame enough not to complain 	1
i^marriage m g&gt; voluntarily, their young queen in marriage to the 	1
imbibe the same unfavourable opinion of his actions, 	1
I mentioned to your lordship that I differed little from you 	1
I might also have been sometimes no less fortunate with you. 	1
I might easily have drawn, from the different reposi- 	1
imitating the interested policy of Henry, rather than 	1
Immediately after the conclusion of the peace, the 	1
Immediately after the queen's imprisonment the con- 	1
Immediately upon the king's leaving Stirling, and The king 	1
immediate recourse to the queen regent; and, as her 	1
Immense wealth, extreme indolence, gross ignorance, 	1
immortal work. But our exchange resembles the politics 	1
impartial person, from any imputation of blame on that 	1
impatience of public curiosity, and which proceeded 	1
Impatient of subordination, and forgetting their proper 	1
impetuosity of passion. Buchanan describes the mur- 	1
implacable aversion to France, which possessed a great 	1
implacable resentment, an immoderate desire of power, 	1
implored the assistance of the congregation for their 	1
implore the aid of other princes, whose delicacy on 	1
importance, and the defection of a man so eminent for 	1
importance, because they could add weight to either 	1
importance. But the leaders of the congregation, hav- Rapid 	1
importance in the Scottish parliament" 1 . The delibera- 	1
importance. It was impossible to defend an open and 	1
importance to him. It not only drove the queen her- 	1
importance to our kings. James the sixth, on pretence that the lords of 	1
importance to the crown, and no less fatal to the ari- 	1
importance to the nation, from being in the power of a 	1
important business on me at once. I could not go 	1
importunities of his clergy, he let loose all the rage of 	1
imposed on so grossly by her artifices; she was now 	1
impossible for Mary to behave towards her husband 	1
impossible her subjects might make good their charge 	1
impossible she could be altogether ignorant how much 	1
impossible that the queen, unless we suppose her to have been a woman 	1
impossible to resist or divert that torrent of religious 	1
impotent hatred of the Roman pontiff, or the slow coun- 	1
impracticable. In this situation, she was under the 	1
impression on his fidelity to his associates, she endea- 	1
imprisonment. The fourth, that after trial and con- 	1
imprisonment, was void in law, and might be revoked, 	1
imprisonment, were extorted from her by fear. Sir 	1
improved by the experience and observation of many 	1
improved every opportunity of insinuating his design 	1
improved upon it. The affairs of the two kingdoms 	1
improve the blow, by which his father proposed, se- 	1
improve this to the utmost. He complained loudly that Opposed by 	1
improvr houses, an account of it was transmitted to Mary by 	1
impunity. No wonder he declined a step so fatal to 	1
impunity. The new doctrines were still in their infancy ; 	1
imputed an affection so excessive to the influence of 	1
imputed to force, and be held invalid. In order to 	1
imputed to the earl of Mar, this added not a little to 	1
imputed to the effects of poison, which was supposed 	1
In 1733, his father having been translated to the mi- 	1
In 1751, having settled his orphan sisters, he thought 	1
In 1776 your lordship published the Secret Correspondence 	1
In 1778 the English Roman catholics were relieved 	1
In 1791 he published his last work, a Disquisition 	1
in a body. But, on the other hand, Bothwell durst 	1
in absolute solitude. Nothing could be more singular, 	1
in a clear light ; and where the bulk of historians have 	1
in a country where he was universally hated or de- 	1
in action to be vain, abruptly dismissed her army, and 	1
in administration was observed, every encroachment 	1
in a knight 1 ." The number of eminent persons who 	1
in a light which dispels much of the darkness and con- 	1
in a like situation. The game they play is deep; their 	1
in all probability, have procured them, if not the entire 	1
in all the arts of insinuation and address. Under pre- 	1
in all the intrigues which were carried on at the English 	1
in all the kingdoms of Europe. This surprising simi- when Bruce 	1
in all the proclamations against Murray, of which so many are published 	1
in almost every circumstance. The accounts of the attempt upon Darnly 	1
in a meeting of privy council, where he was present, took measures for se- 	1
in ancient learning ; and all of them eagerly adopted 	1
in an eminent degree. To the most unquestionable 1559. 	1
in any such exigency, by entering into a secret corre- 	1
in a pardon, and then all lesser offences are deemed 	1
in a prison, from which he had neither any intention 	1
In a subsequent assembly, which met in the month 	1
inattention of a martial age to the forms and detail of 	1
in authority. The lowest of these is the kirk sessions, 	1
in camps that subjects were accustomed to address the 	1
Incapable of bearing these repeated insults, he found 	1
inclination, by conferring upon Darnly titles of honour 	1
incompatible with regal dignity, and so inconsistent with 	1
In compliance with their injunctions, the established 	1
in condescension to the lords in parliament, who, on 	1
inconfii- th rear &gt; horse and foot fell into the utmost confusion, and 	1
in consequence of it, drew the attention and employed 	1
in consequence of the statute which the king had ob- 	1
In consequence of this destination, the validity where- 	1
inconsiderable; and, notwithstanding all their efforts, 	1
inconsiderable. But as the number of their followers, General 	1
inconsiderable portion of his attention seems to have 	1
inconsistent enterprises. His reign was a perpetual 	1
inconsistent with all the rules of prudence and of de- 	1
inconsistent with Elizabeth's interest, or more contra- 	1
inconsistent with liberty, was abolished during the civil war; and the sta- 	1
inconvenience in pursuing either of them, she might 	1
in corners, were contented with a form of government 	1
incorporating. In the other, injuries were still fresh, 	1
increased to one accustomed from his earliest years to 	1
incredible. Even after those causes, which first gave 	1
in danger, he adopted a directly opposite conduct afterwards, 	1
indebted to their intercourse with the Romans, for the 	1
in December, 1564. Keith, 268. It was in consequence of this prefer- 	1
indeed, is not, on any occasion, sparing in my praise. 	1
indeed, to address an audience on the important truths 	1
in defence of their own conduct. She declared it to 	1
in defence of the reformation, together with the de- 	1
independence of manhood : but it must be remembered 	1
independence of Scotland. Before the union of the concerning 	1
independence. The chieftains, in that part of the 	1
independent of the crown, and followed by numerous 	1
independent they became ; and the same persons being 	1
India, etc. He informs us that the idea of this book 	1
indignation against popery. Their attacks were bolder 	1
indignation had time to cool ; and the English having 	1
indignation, one of the severest, perhaps, which can 	1
indignation which became an historian u . Knox, whose 	1
indiscriminate manner of signifying consent, every per- 	1
in dispute, and the absence of many noblemen, with 	1
indissoluble. With this view, they empowered these 	1
individuals, took place among the nobles in this conven- 	1
inducement, a conversation between lord Chesterfield 	1
industriously exercised himself in translating from the 	1
in Edinburgh, and headed by others in disguise, en- 	1
ineffectual all his schemes, he solemnly swore, that he 	1
IN EIGHT VOLUMES. 	1
in enabling him to put it in execution. Under the feudal 	1
in England. By procuring this cessation of arms, 	1
in England, under English protection. This scheme 	1
in England, with success, what their unskilful predecessors had at- 	1
in Europe, to trace its rise, its progress, and revolutions. In Germany, every 	1
in execution and uninteresting in detail. One circum- 	1
inexperience, her education in a foreign country, and 	1
infamous in history, for the enormity and scandal of 	1
infamous treaty ; other barons were ready to concur with 	1
infamy of the Scottish queen". 	1
infants. Even the most regular and best-established 	1
in, fatal effects would follow, and no man, how great 	1
infected with ambition, nor inclined to cruelty. The 	1
inferior judicatories, strict obedience to those who are 	1
inferior to no prince of that age in gracefulness of per- 	1
inferior to that of its former monarchs. 	1
inferior to the enemy in number, he confided BO much 	1
infinite regret, the progress of the protestant religion 	1
inflamed parties in that age have descended to their 	1
inflamed the multitude with the utmost rage. The indis- 	1
inflict. The blow, however long suspended, was un- 	1
inflict the severest vengeance on the whole party. She 	1
influence a capricious and irregular mind. He hoped, 	1
influence became so powerful, that the period from his 	1
influence is derived from titles of honour, the feudal 	1
influence of France, the ancient ally of the kingdom, 	1
influence of the events in his reign upon those of the 	1
influence over the lords of articles became, likewise, an object of greater 	1
in foreign politics wild and irregular. But the vices of 	1
information on the subject. 	1
informed him that Mary, in order to sooth Elizabeth, 	1
informs us, that in undertaking this task, the author's 	1
in France, acknowledges, " that in that parliament she intended to have 	1
in France could be of long continuance, and many things 	1
infuse, this passion. It descended to her from Henry 	1
ing . 	1
ing 1 . Mary resolved, without any further delay, to 	1
ing accustomed to decide every quarrel by a battle, 	1
ing affection towards him in all her actions, were willing 	1
ing all these, he was torn from her by violence, and, be- 	1
ing, and the restless and martial genius of the people 	1
ing, and will appear in time. 	1
ing, and without experience, conceited, at the same 	1
ing any course which could be offensive to her. When 	1
ing any footing in the nation. With this view, she 	1
ing armies were unknown, as long as the feudal govern- 	1
ing a stain upon her own reputation, admit her into her 	1
ing a stipend. Keith, 570. In another meeting of privy council, May the 	1
ing, by his inconsistency, forfeited the public esteem, was 	1
ing century. The Scots had chosen their ground so 	1
ing, charters were obtained, containing an exemption 	1
ing danger, and discovered manifest symptoms of re- 	1
ing deferred so long to return you my best thanks for the 	1
ing destroyed most of the great cities, and the countries 	1
ing Elizabeth, he durst not venture on the most distant 	1
ing for the dilatory conduct of his mistress with regard 	1
ing from the forfeiture of persons who were to be tried 	1
ing from the taxes imposed on the different branches 	1
ing genius of their leaders. Francis the second had 	1
ing government into the minds of their hearers ; and the 	1
ing heart. 	1
ing her a promise, on his allegiance, to hold no farther 	1
ing her escape was entirely cut off. She now felt 	1
ing her person had at first excited her indignation, yet 	1
ing his eldest son, whom the cardinal had detained for 	1
ing-houses in Glasgow and Dumbarton the thirtieth of March, the first and 	1
ing intelligence of her design, prevented the execution e&amp;sof 	1
ing its course up the frith of Forth. As they knew that 	1
in giving encouragement to opinions so favourable to 	1
ing Mary, she might at any time ruin him ; and by a 	1
ing oak, which, watered by the dews of many a spring, 	1
ing of this able politician had proved greatly an over- 	1
ing on classic studies, his father, induced probably by 	1
in good policy, as well as in duty, to conceal and to 	1
in great societies ; and the territory of a baron was, in 	1
ings began to move many to commiserate her case. 	1
ing, she became furiously mad. This injury made a 	1
ing some general ideas as to the .manner in which it 	1
ing some houses in the suburbs, retired with their 	1
ing spirit engaged him in projects vast and splendid, 	1
ing, stoop low before, their fellows behind holding their pikes with both 	1
ing such as had embraced it from the penalties to which 	1
ing the * conference.' The great abilities of the de- York! 6 	1
ing the inconveniencies arising from the short terms of 	1
ing their sacred rights by no better tenure than a de- 	1
ing the king's inflexible temper, to sacrifice her own 	1
ing the lawfulness of the meeting. No commissioner 	1
ing the liberty and independence of the nation, and for 	1
ing themselves of every circumstance which occurred, 	1
ing the murderers of the king, and dissolving the mar- 	1
ing the one and in preventing the other r . 	1
ing the privileges of the nobility. 	1
ing the queen's marriage with the dauphin, and her 	1
ing there crossed the Forth, they proceeded along the 	1
ing these vigorous proceedings of the protestants, they 	1
ing the sole direction of affairs. Some of the most emi- 	1
ing. They were solicited in behalf of the fugitives 	1
ing this end. The resources of our monarchs were 	1
ing this part of the English and Scottish history, as 	1
ing those feelings which are natural to a man, or that 	1
ing those, upon whom it fell, from Christian privileges, 	1
ing, to answer to such things as should be laid to his 	1
ing to intermeddle in the internal government of her 	1
ing to it, would have tacitly recognised the right of her 	1
ing to the exigency of their affairs. From them Cock- 	1
ing to the pride of the queen, and so full of contempt 	1
ing vengeance; but the same laws, in order to punish his cowardice, and 	1
ing visibly to reestablish order, tranquillity, and justice, 	1
ing, while she resided so near Scotland, it was thought 	1
ing year d . Nothing less than a zeal, ready to endure 	1
inhabitants, banished others, removed the magistrates 	1
inhabitants of that city, and to all others concerned in 	1
inhabitants of that new world. I have always thought 	1
in her attempts to crush them. When their affairs put 	1
in her be- 	1
in her favour and confidence. Kirkaldy of Grange, 	1
in her favour. He, as well as his brother, kept a secret 	1
in her name k . 	1
in her own name, and in her husband's, to bring the 	1
in her power. Her resentment alone might have gone 	1
in her power to prevent his stirring out of London. 	1
in her present condition, degraded from her throne, 	1
in her sentiments with respect to the king?. The death 	1
in his camp before Roxburgh castle. He durst not 	1
in his capital city ; the person suspected of that odious 	1
in his conclusions with regard to the balance of power, 	1
in his grandeur, saw the ruin of himself and his friends. 	1
in his own power. The queen, in order to prevail on March 19. 	1
in his rude Latin: " In diebus illis, non erat lex in Scotia, sed quilibet po- 	1
in honour and in interest, to repel the enemy. The 	1
iniquity. He had so far succeeded in his ambitious 	1
in Italy, was not long confined to that country of poli- 	1
in it, and which the feebleness of government at that time rendered neces- 	1
in it. At last James the fifth erected a new court that 	1
injury offered to the latter, but in cases where the li- J567. 	1
injury to the duke of Chatelherault, who, as first prince 	1
injustice in detaining that prince a prisoner, by their 	1
In justification of this rigour, the confederates main- 	1
in Keith, Appendix, 108, etc. neither the violent attempt upon Darnly, nor 	1
in legislation, the sentiments and dispositions of the 	1
in Leith, but the immediate conclusion of a peace, or ! conclude 	1
in men's clothes. The confederates advanced towards 	1
in more perfectly with her views concerning Scottish 	1
in my preface. But an hour's conversation with you, would 	1
in my receiving your letter, and will prevent me from 	1
Innes, Essay, 552. 	1
innocence from any criminal intrigue with Rizzio, from the 	1
innocence with great warmth. Mary continued to in- 	1
innocent, are monuments both of the king's hatred of 	1
innocent or commendable deed b . The vices of another 	1
In no scene of her life was ever Mary's own address Mary's 	1
innovation, with that manly and determined boldness 	1
in opposing the dangerous encroachments of the French ~ 	1
in order It was vain to expect the assistance of the Scottish 	1
In order to account for Elizabeth's present, as well as 	1
in order to add the greater weight to their councils, 	1
In order to arrive at the desired elevation, the queen 	1
In order to check their career, the queen, without 	1
in order to counterbalance the one, and to restrain the 	1
In order to give the queen and her privy council a Motives 	1
In order to gratify their own vanity, and to render their 	1
in order to gratify them, they deserted their former 	1
in order to increase, by this additional accusation, the 	1
In order to persuade Elizabeth that she desired no- 	1
In order to prevent this, Cockburn of Ormiston was 	1
In order to prevent this, the emperor entered into a 	1
In order to provide against this imminent calamity, 	1
in order to provide for the sustentation of ministers in boroughs, and Both- 	1
in order to render him illustrious. These he possessed 	1
in order to secure a safe return into Scotland, ad- 	1
In order to set their own conduct in the most fa- 	1
in other places, a single town or church sent several 	1
In other words, an officer disagreeable to his general 	1
in parliament, and pretended no right to the dignity or 	1
in paying court to Mary ; and Lesley, afterwards bishop 	1
in perpetual anxiety and dependence, or, by the authority 	1
in politeness, are frequently no less tenacious, out of 	1
in printing the Appendix, and stay till I wrote to you. If 	1
in private, according to the forms prescribed by the 	1
In prosecution of this design, but under pretence of 1554. 	1
in quarto, which will probably go to the press in the course of 	1
in question the legitimacy of the queen's birth, and, by 	1
inquiry, she would, thenceforth, cease to be the object 	1
inquiry, to employ all her power and influence towards 	1
inquisition lighted in the streets of Edinburgh ; they 	1
in religion dreaded his severity, and others considered 	1
in religion, was no longer to be trusted ; and, by way 	1
in rendering dear to her ; they were the leaders of a 	1
inroad on the western borders was concerted by his 	1
in Scotland against the law of patronage, not only 	1
in Scotland. All the low country, the most populous, 	1
in Scotland ; and, sensible what an unsurmoun table ob- 	1
in Scotland, and to put him besides the crown ; that it be- 	1
in Scotland, are predicted with great accuracy and dis- 	1
in Scotland. ^ e reformed faith. To break the power and reputation 	1
in Scotland, in some decent retirement, without any 	1
in Scotland. The Scottish nobles enjoyed, in common 	1
In Scotland, where the riches of the clergy bore as 	1
in Scotland, who made no doubt of their issuing in her 	1
inseparable from human nature, hath filled that void 	1
insidious her intentions were, and, by consequence, 	1
Insight gear, i. e. household furniture, not reckoned. 	1
insignificance, to which he saw himself reduced. But, 	1
insinuation of the queen's being accessory to the mur- 	1
insinuations made a deep impression on the regent's 	1
insisted on the full and rigorous execution of their plan. 	1
in so high a sphere are commonly exempted. 	1
insolent importunity 1 ". Though Mary alleged that this 	1
inspired them with thoughts of vengeance, in no wise" 	1
inspired with awe and reverence. Besides the places 	1
inspire. The pursuit was continued for five hours, and 	1
in spite of many delays, and after looking, with the 	1
in spite to the queen, who had entered into so close an 	1
instances of the impotence of regal authority, which are 	1
instances, to have been his great confident. Ibid. 5. As the king was not 	1
instantly dispersed all over the kingdom, and commonly 	1
instantly joined the confederacy, which had been form- 	1
instantly to the English court, and, in her name, to 	1
in stations of dignity and affluence. In consequence of 	1
In stature Dr. Robertson was rather above the mid- 	1
instead of confining him to any prison, Mary admitted v ! ur ^ m- 	1
instead of meeting with that welcome reception which 	1
instead of rejecting the improbable tales of chronicle 	1
instigated by the violent counsels of d'Oysel, had ven- 	1
instigation, James Hamilton, earl of Arran, and next 	1
in Stirling castle. James urged him to dissolve that 	1
institutions prevailed, at their own expense, deserted 	1
institutions, the towns in Scotland were extremely few t 	1
instructed Maitland to signify her willingness to dis- 	1
instruction of youth. In order to quiet their fears with 	1
instructions for directing their proceedings 8 , which are 	1
instructions to her ambassadors still remain, and are 	1
instructions with regard to the regent's demands, he 	1
in such a cruel manner, were now ready to applaud and 	1
in such a temper, a parliamentary declaration of Mary's P er P' exit y 	1
insulted and abused ; and, if the prior of St. Andrew's 	1
in suspense, were among the most powerful subjects in 	1
Intelligence of all this reached Scotland before the 	1
intended flight. But he was more than usually way- 	1
intended marriage with Bothwell having spread early 	1
intends to continue the same goodness and government in all times coming, 	1
intention of Elizabeth. The right of succession was a 	1
intentions, the protestants, who saw the danger ap- 	1
intention to encourage the spirit which had already 	1
intercept the person of the Scottish queen*. 	1
interest, avoided the blow by not going to Perth. Mary, 	1
interesting. 	1
interesting, and the execution masterly ; and that it was pro- 	1
interesting kind. Besides the pleasure which I shall enjoy 	1
interesting part of biographical narrative. 	1
interest of a faction was preferred before the honour of 	1
interest of France, her native country, and attached to 	1
interest of the crown to foment rather than to extin- 	1
interest of their country with a boldness, which con- 	1
interest of those who governed the kingdom, to prevent 	1
interference with him should never be any obstruction 	1
interfering with Mr. David Hume, who is your friend : 	1
internal police of his kingdom, or to think of retrench- 	1
interposes 	1
interrupted by the reformation, but I find it much otherwise ; 	1
interrupted. Three days after the marriage, Murray 	1
interrupt the narrative by taking notice of lesser trans- 	1
interval of his stay, the hours of meeting, which were mu- 	1
interview. The whole business of the court was to Feb. 13. 	1
in that age, and was really, a concession of greater importance 	1
in that capacity. She proposed to appoint commission- 	1
in that country. The first kings of the Norman race, 	1
in that kingdom, excited universal indignation; and 	1
in the castle of Edinburgh. After various intrigues, 	1
in the choice of her ministers ; in distinguishing her fa- 	1
in the church of Scotland : it was, whether the claim 	1
in the confidence of that generous prince z . By his 	1
in the consciousness of having insulted and annoyed 	1
In the counties which border on England, this defect 	1
in the county of Mid Lothian, a parish of which his 	1
in the dark. We may conjecture, however, from some 	1
in the eyes of all Europe. By many, her title was es- 	1
in the formation of a society, the object of whose mem- 	1
In the former, the feudal institutions still subsist with great vigour ; and 	1
in the history, or inconsistent with the constitution, of 	1
in the human mind. The natural demand of this pas- 	1
in their behalf, yielded at last to the solicitations of 	1
in their end was uniformly the same ; and that the project of 	1
in their present dispersed and helpless situation, she 	1
in the kingdom. But, at the same time that he endea- 	1
in the kingdom. The instructions of the parliament 1557. 	1
in the kingdom y . By this conduct, she thinned the ec- 	1
in the king's name, had added so much strength to the 	1
in the marriage-articles between their queen and Philip 	1
in the marriage of the Scottish queen, all that was now 	1
In the mean time, Mary was in no haste to return Mary bc- 	1
In the mean time, the queen, who had prudently 	1
In the meeting held the twenty-fourth of June, previous 	1
in the most favourable light, might have conducted the 	1
in the name of the late king ; and, without any other 	1
in the national property, which far exceeded the pro- 	1
in the one, was not greater than that which she acquired 	1
in the other. 	1
in the presence of the king, the bishop, or the count, and unless he can 	1
In the present conjuncture, however, nothing could be 	1
in the progress of the conference, as well as the final 	1
in the pursuit, the English discovered all the rage and 	1
in the queen's chapel, according to the rites of the Ro- l&gt;arnly. 	1
In the rebellion that broke out in Scotland in 1745, 	1
In the reign of James the second, William, the eighth 	1
in the reign of William the third ; this encouraged the 	1
in the rudest and most imperfect state of society. The 	1
in the same collection, giving a full account of all his operations in Scot- 	1
In the same proportion that the king sunk in power, 	1
in the scenes they describe, they wrote an apology for 	1
in the south ; and their vassals, living in a state of per- 	1
in the southern and more civilized parts of the island, 	1
in the struggle than his ancestors. In this extremity, 	1
in the unfortunate rout near the firth of Solway, and 	1
in the use of their theological weapons. But they gave 	1
in the valour of his troops and the experience of his 	1
in the way. This was expected of him, in consequence 1569. 	1
in the words of it might have brought the present ques- 	1
In the year 1777, immediately following that of the 	1
in the year one thousand five hundred and fifteen, and 	1
in the year one thousand five hundred and nineteen, 	1
In this conspiracy there is one circumstance which, 	1
In this convention, the protestant clergy did not ob- 	1
in this country are understood in the other part of the 	1
in this court were churchmen. 	1
in this manner, from his engagements; and instantly 	1
in this new association, who brought a great accession 	1
In this posture were the affairs of Scotland, when the 	1
In this situation did the affair remain, when lord 	1
In this situation of Europe, Scotland, which had 	1
In this situation of their affairs, the congregation Elizabeth 	1
in this situation, the earl of Angus, who commanded the 	1
In those circumstances, an act of clemency would 	1
in three volumes quarto. This work proved that the 	1
intimates that he was afraid her familiarity with Rizio might be liable to 	1
in times of peace, a prince may endeavour to depress 	1
intimidate the archbishop. Under his management, 	1
into Edinburgh with great pomp. Nothing was neg- 	1
into Eliza- 	1
into Eng- ations with Murray and his party, who left that place 	1
into England. 	1
into England as hostages y . With respect to the safe 	1
into England to conclude a treaty, and to settle the 	1
into execution. 	1
into execution. But, under their vigorous and decisive 	1
into favour such of her subjects as had appeared in 	1
into Flanders; and she permitted Bothwell to return 	1
into France, he was taken into the queen's service, and 	1
into France to be educated at his court, they granted, 	1
into France, were no less obvious. The French king 	1
into her on one hand, by a promise more flattering than any 	1
into his nephew his own sentiments concerning religion, 	1
into immediate action. With tumultuary, but irresisti- 	1
into many small tribes ; and when they came to parcel 	1
into parliament for that purpose. Dr. Robertson, who, 	1
into Scotland. Accustomed to the elegance, splendour, 	1
into Scotland, against the time of the prince's baptism, 	1
into Scotland, and hath made boast that he will do great things, and live in 	1
into Scotland': and yet, no sooner did he acquire a 	1
into Scotland, gained admission into the queen's family 	1
into secret cabals with those noblemen who were known 	1
into strength by daily reinforcements, and openly pre- 	1
into that period of Scots History from the death of king James 	1
into the character and situation of the archduke n . 	1
into the heart of the kingdom. 	1
into the house whence the blow had come, but they 	1
into the kingdom which they had conquered, or with 	1
into the queen's hands, and enforced it with the ut- 	1
into the schemes of his sovereign, or pursued them with 	1
into the Scottish parliaments by Robert Bruce'; and in 	1
into the snare in which Elizabeth and her ministers 1568. 	1
into the town of Perth. At once, she threw off the %? 	1
into the west, mass continued to be celebrated in her 	1
into two houses, but composed one assembly, in which 	1
intrepidity, military skill, sagacity, and vigour in the 	1
intrepidity of mind, which set him above fear. He 	1
intrepidity, which merits the admiration and gratitude 	1
intrigue, however, had been secretly carried on, since 	1
intrigues The duke of Norfolk was, at that time, the most 	1
intrigues with England, and all the usual preparatives 	1
introduced at the same time, added greater force to 	1
introduced by the reformers differed extremely from 	1
introduced French troops into Perth, fined some of the 	1
intrusted to such able and zealous advocates, could not 	1
intrusting to mercenary hands the defence of those ter- 	1
in two points ; one, that the lord of Grange, late treasurer of Scotland, the 	1
in undermining their exorbitant power, they had no 	1
in ungovernable phrensy. 	1
invaded the kingdom. The success which at first at- 	1
invaded the lands of his rival in an hostile manner. 	1
invaded the rights or property of her subjects ; or what 	1
In vain did the clergy display the advantages which 	1
In vain did they even intermingle threatenings of the 	1
invar, and sir James Cockburn, of Stirling, to appear 	1
invited her to take refuge in England, and had pro- 	1
invited the attendance of Willox, one of the most emi- 	1
in wasting the open country, and in taking or building 	1
in whatever point of light we view it, is instructive and 	1
in which Elizabeth appeared, on this occasion, strikes 	1
in which he was kept. It ill suited his years, or dispo- 	1
in which place, on account of its commodious harbour, 	1
in which they clearly stated the point under delibera- 	1
in wisdom is often lost in perspicuity of communication, 	1
in with this plan, which deviated so manifestly from 	1
in your society and conversation, I cherish the expectation of 	1
Ireland ; and, extending themselves by degrees, landed 	1
I remain, etc. 	1
irresistible, had extended only to a few counties, and 	1
irresolution and inconsistence which is peculiar to weak 	1
irritated by multiplied impositions, could neither be 	1
irritated the whole body of the nobility, and which the 	1
ir-Ti-11'i r&gt; i it i ministers. 	1
is almost nothing ; and so permanent are feudal principles, that although 	1
is already become a favourite subject of conversation, 	1
is charmed. I hear the same of the princess and prince of 	1
is composed of representatives from the presbyteries ; 	1
is derived from one circumstance, that neither the secre- 	1
Is divorced Bothwell having now got the queen's person into his 	1
I shall endeavour to find out the unhappy philosopher you 	1
is high treason; and Bothwell hoped that a pardon 	1
I should be better at Edinburgh. 	1
I should rejoice if I could repay these losses by a visit to 	1
is, if an accord might be made betwixt our mistress and the Scottish queen, 	1
is known to every one who has been the least conver- 	1
island, I considered it as my duty to lay before his 	1
is likely to prevail. Meanwhile, I can inform both of them 	1
Is married What these were, soon became public. The title 	1
is naturally the object of compassion. The comparison 	1
is neither just nor safe to disregard. A rash measure 	1
is not a weapon fit to encounter the Scottish spear. In 	1
is now uncertain whether I shall ever leave it. I have had 	1
is so cruel as never to overlook those flaws ; and nothing but 	1
issue by the queen, no incident could have been more 	1
issued a proclamation, enjoining all persons to observe 	1
issued soon after the arrival of the queen in Scotland, 	1
is, that you should continue your Annals at least to the death 	1
is, the discussion on the manners and character of the 	1
is unrolled at once, and there is no state or gradation 	1
is very minute ; and, in conclusion, the sum total of mischief they did is 	1
is well qualified to gild her. 	1
it ; and if the sudden death of Edward had not pre- 	1
It appeared in this light to Elizabeth, and afforded Dec. 4. 	1
it appears be her highness and her council, that his purgation in that behalf 	1
It appears from his letters at this period, that he en- 	1
It A very singular proof of this occurs in the French history. Arpin sold 	1
it; besides the impossibility of accomplishing such a marriage, if it had 	1
it, by the marriage of the queen of Scots to the dauphin. 	1
it contributed to the ornament of his court ; nor did he 	1
it deprived them of all their rights, as men, or as citi- 	1
it derived from a people who at first settled there as 	1
it, Elizabeth permitted the malecontents peaceably to 	1
I tell foreigners, that while the meaner heroes fight, Achilles 	1
it for the future *. The paper containing these de- 	1
It gives me unfeigned pleasure to have been the instru- 	1
it had been sunk for many ages. The human mind felt 	1
it. He represented to the regent his great imprudence 	1
I think that I can satisfy your lordship that it was esteemed 	1
I think the only tolerable, decent gentleman of the fa- 	1
it. I find in Forbes's manuscript papers, sent me by lord 	1
it if it came through any other canal whatsoever, even that 	1
it impossible to give credit to those studied professions. 	1
it improbable that she would choose the former ; and 	1
it in endless difficulties. In the mean time, she was 	1
it in his own kingdom. He saw there, nobles great, but 	1
it in inextricable perplexity. 	1
it in that kingdom. 	1
it in the manner I could wish, and the public will ex- 	1
it in the utmost hurry, as Strahan is clamouring for it. I 	1
it. I own that I am very curious on that head. I cannot so 	1
it is childish to wait, till the designs of an enemy be ripe 	1
it is easily possible) all connexions with the great, I believe 	1
It is, however, more probable, that Mary meant to say, that the nobles, then 	1
it is impossible long to preserve the memory of past 	1
It is impossible to describe the emotions of joy which, 	1
it is mere pedantry or ignorance to measure their con- 	1
it is necessary to inquire into the origin and constitution 	1
It is never pronounced in these words : why should it 	1
It is no easy matter to form any conjecture concerning 	1
it is no slight proof, both of the firmness and dexterity 	1
IT is now twenty-eight years since I published the 	1
It is observable, however, that the same parsimoni- 	1
It is observable, that this first instance of contempt 	1
It is obvious that in the general assembly a wide 	1
it is probable, considered him as a powerful magician, 	1
It is probable, however, that the want of the pope's 	1
It is probable, that neither of them was sincere in 	1
It is remarkable, that the prosperous situation of the 	1
It is remarkable too, that Bothwell himself was pre- 	1
it may remain for ever a perpetual memory of the vengeance of God lightened 	1
it more than all the premeditated attacks of preceding 	1
it necessary for Elizabeth to comply; they flattered 	1
it not only to dazzle but to please. Mary was of an Gains the 	1
it. One part of military science, the art of attacking 	1
It opens with the famous controversy concerning the Rise f tne 	1
it, or passing it again ? Mary's title was more undisputable 	1
it. Perhaps the number of minute but indispensable cares 	1
it possible to fetter and circumscribe the Scottish queen, 	1
it probsrble that some violence was intended against Murray : 	1
it proposed in the general assembly. His opponents, 	1
it, raze and destroy it piecemeal ; and after this sort, spending one month 	1
it right to inquire particularly into lord Bute's inten- 	1
its ancient and legal limits. Their eagerness to prevent 	1
its application to particular cases, there ensued a de- 	1
itsaristocra- . . i . , 	1
its assistance, and, after a desperate fight, Bothwell 	1
its decrees. It possesses also extensive legislative pow- 	1
its directions from thence, appears henceforward in our 	1
it seems probable, that what they rejected could not 	1
It seems to have been a maxim in that age, that every 	1
its enemies. The revenues of the popish church were 	1
its establishment it boasted a hundred members, among 	1
Its general assemblies were held regularly ; but no bu- 	1
it. She determined to revive her claim on the first 	1
its numbers and authority, usually had great weight in 	1
its operations, produced the same effects in small, as ll ' 	1
its own strength, broke the fetters of authority, by 	1
its place, and thought it sufficient to ratify it word for word. This errour I 	1
Its pro- it effectual, passed without dispute or delay. The ar- 	1
its spoils some new family, which would soon adopt the 	1
it. Such were the first rudiments, or infancy of feudal 	1
It the one crown had been considered not as imperial O f Scotland, 	1
it, the victory at Dunbar gave Cromwell the command 	1
it, they could not, with all their efforts, hide from her 	1
it to Cecil 1 . His personal safety, as well as the continu- 	1
it to parliamentary discussion, or derive any addition to 	1
it to recover the opportunity which he had lost. A April, 1548. 	1
it upon no unequal conditions. Together with a sus- ~ 	1
It was a leaf of your history, and the very character of queen 	1
It was an account of this holy league which the se- 	1
it was asserted, not only called upon, but obliged her 	1
It was by the advice, or at least with the consent, of particularly 	1
It was copied in many monasteries, and the thread of 	1
It was Darnly's misfortune to fall under the manage- Darnly's 	1
it was, however, extremely ruinous to individuals. There still remain two 	1
It was impossible she could make any choice more in- 	1
It was indeed to be apprehended^ that the treating 	1
It was in Italy, that the powerful monarchs of France 	1
It was in the parliament which met on the tenth of She obtains 	1
it was manifestly, at that juncture, to court and to sooth 	1
it was my intention to have requested of you, that if any er- 	1
It was necessary to maintain a kind of army of observa- 	1
it was no easy matter to deceive an adversary as vigilant 	1
It was not her own subjects alone who suspected 	1
it was not lasting. 	1
It was not long before Mary was convinced, that 	1
It was not possible to agree to a proposal so extra- 	1
It was not so with the next attempt which the king 	1
It was not without hesitation and anxiety that the 	1
It was not without reason that the queen dreaded 	1
It was obvious to foresee difficulties in the execu- 	1
it was of" great importance to hurry over the trial, while 	1
it was pretended that the decision of the contest be- 	1
it was taken with her participation and advice a . 	1
It was then expected that the regent would have 	1
it were violent and unusual, and in that age it was com- 	1
it, with all their credit, at the court of France. The 	1
it with so much ardour, that the invitation was given, 	1
it with your remarks to-morrow morning. I would wish, if 	1
it would ill become me to say any thing. Whether the 	1
Iviii PREFACE. 	1
iv THE LIFE OF 	1
I was confined with a painful fit of the gout, and in the short 	1
Ix PREFACE. 	1
Jac. I. 1425. cap. 52. 	1
James 	1
James Balfour, the deputy governor, and Bothwell 	1
James had no reason to confide in an army so little 	1
James had now not only the name, but, though ex- 	1
James's sentiments before he apprehended his mother to be 	1
James the 	1
James the But James the fifth, who succeeded his father, was 	1
James the fifth, Mary suffered all the rigour and 	1
James the fifth, this dangerous license had grown to an 	1
James the fifth, we know by the original warrant still 	1
James the first as an impassable boundary beyond which you 	1
James the first was seized by the English during the James 	1
James the fogj. on iy son J am es, a prince whose birth was happy 	1
James the fourth, to the throne, enjoyed a great share 	1
James the fourth was naturally generous and brave ; James the 	1
James the James the third discovered no less eagerness than 	1
James the second convinced him, that the oppression 	1
James the The confederates endeavoured to give this resigna- 	1
James the third, and with a full resolution of imitating 	1
James the third imposed severe penalties upon those 	1
James. They flattered themselves that they might step 	1
James ventured to proceed with greater boldness. In 	1
James was a prince of great abilities, and conducted 	1
James was too wise a prince to employ open force to 	1
Jan. 15. They presented it to a convention of estates, which was 	1
J Anders, vol. iv. part ii. 64. 80. 	1
Janet Beatoun, the regent's mother, after he had obtained a divorce from 	1
J Burn. 3. Append. 308. Keith, 154, etc. 	1
J Camden affirms, 401, that Bedford was commanded by Elizabeth not 	1
jealousies among the Scots, as would, in all probability, 	1
jealousy and reserve, with which a foreigner should be 	1
jealousy of the princes of Lorrain rendered her no less 	1
jealousy of the Scots, what time and accidents would 	1
jealousy which is inseparable from the love of civil li- 	1
ject. But how can you acquire knowledge of the great works 	1
ject can appear ; its first run will not be marred by any 	1
jected to the review of courts of law, whose forms of 	1
ject had kindled in Scotland, my ideas concerning the 	1
jecting the claims of new pretenders. 	1
ject, justify any departure from the common and esta- 	1
jects, her duty to the public, her concern for posterity, 	1
jects not only as indecent but flagitious, could not appear in the same light 	1
jects not only to resist tyrannical princes, but to deprive 	1
jects, that, notwithstanding all the clamours of the 	1
jects. The refusal of le Croc, the French ambassa-"" 	1
jects to humble the nobles had been; and that, though, 	1
ject to all the variety arising from the caprice of lawyers, 	1
jecture, and ought to be totally neglected, or abandoned 	1
ject, which he afterwards more openly avowed, of 	1
Jedburgh c ; and when he afterwards thought fit to Nov. 5. 	1
jesty only to undo them. This is the unreasonableness of the people, which 	1
jesty's generosity and that of his ministers, and would refuse 	1
jesty's generosity, will spread the fame of your lenity 	1
J Keith, 274. Sec Append. No. X. r Keith, Append. 161. 	1
John Home, lord Kaims, Dr. Robertson, Dr. Carlyle, 	1
Johnson, has preserved a discourse of the learned 	1
John Wishart of Pitarrow, the chief of that name, a man of abilities, zea- 	1
joiced at her departure, graced it with every circum- 	1
joined by many of the citizens, whose zeal became the 	1
joined with him in commission. Macgill of Rankeilor, 	1
joining entirely with either of them. But he was seldom 	1
join them ; and, as it does not appear that they were 	1
join with their countrymen in compelling her to a mea- 	1
journey succeedeth this way most to his majesty's honour," etc. 	1
journey to Lausanne in Switzerland, where I shall fix my 	1
j^.r... 	1
J T , . , . . adherents. 	1
jT, de _ without one dissenting voice, for depriving the queen 	1
judge, and to enable him to enforce his decisions. The words of a pro- 	1
judge, appear to be no more shocked at this crime, 	1
judge from the only sermon he published, he received 	1
judge of its reality. 	1
judges appointed by the barons, whose decisions should 	1
judge. She retracted the offer which she had made, 	1
judges in all matters of civil right ; and, by its original 	1
judge, that the business of my new office has not much inter- 	1
judgment would have highly condemned. As their 	1
judice.' 	1
judices. You have too the rare secret of rekindling 	1
judicial authority was extremely circumscribed. At first, 	1
judicial to her right of succession, which, as she well 	1
jugal affection which prompts to sympathy, and de- 	1
Jul 21 an d Scottish queens. A convention was held at Perth, 	1
July 13. lord Scrope's, on the borders of Yorkshire b . In this 	1
July 28. proper juncture to renew her former proposition, that 	1
July 6. Honourable as this article was for Elizabeth herself, 	1
July 8. About .this time died Henry the second, of France ; 	1
junction, yet many events occurred to widen, rather 	1
juncture, and to deliberate upon matters of so much 	1
juncture, they aimed the blow at the whole fabric of 	1
juncture to conciliate the good-will of the protestants, 	1
juncture, when every step they took was decisive and 	1
juncture, where his own fame, and the being of the 	1
June 13. attempted with unequal strength. Meanwhile, she 	1
June 20. This letter somewhat disconcerted Elizabeth's plan, 	1
June 25. The ecclesiastical transactions of this year were not 	1
June 27. An incident, which happened soon after, increased 	1
June 6. durst not commit to him such an important trust. He 	1
Jure Regni apud Scotos. It is founded, not on the maxims of feudal, but 	1
juries, soon inspired Albany with more ambitious and 	1
jurisdiction of the barons, and to extend that of the 	1
jury, and impatient to revenge it ; who deemed it infa- 	1
justed p . 	1
justice, and loaded with honours, in contempt of de- 	1
justice, be imputed to the whole protestant party. 	1
justice or generosity alone, they would not have found 	1
justice. The malecontents had laboured to defeat a 	1
justice to his people. These acquisitions of our kings, 	1
justice took place, and he was declared an outlaw?. At 	1
justified her own conduct with decency ; and, though 	1
justify or excuse this barbarous havoc, the convention, 	1
justify their unworthy conduct. Various questions concerning the consti- 	1
justling with me, and it will have taken that station in 	1
justly to be suspected in every thing relating to her ; or than 	1
just notion, with respect either to the most illustrious 	1
just when he had adopted a system, with regard to the 1559. 	1
j v a a n d d es Scot ' dignity with which he had been treated, both by the 	1
k Anders, vol. iv. 33. 	1
k Bothw. Trial, Anders, vol. ii. 07, etc. 	1
k Bum. vol. iii. Append. 283. Forbes, i. 387, etc. Keith, Append. 24. 	1
k Camd. 489. Anders, vol. iv. 99. 120. Murdin, 369. 	1
k Craig, lib. iii. Dieg. 7. 	1
keep any measures with Elizabeth ; and sent orders to 	1
keeper of the great seal, the earls of Arundel and 	1
keep one thousand or fifteen hundred men in wages for a month or two, 	1
keep possession: two thirds of their whole revenue 	1
keep Scotland in confusion, by preserving the balance 	1
keep the balance even, and to restrain both, by not 	1
Keith, 137, etc. 	1
Keith, 158. Huntly himself began a correspondence with Elizabeth's 	1
Keith, 160. ' Keith, 278. 	1
Keith, 171. Camden. See Appendix, No. VI. 	1
Keith, 201. 204. Knox, 286. Keith, 196. 	1
Keith, 223. 	1
Keith, 230. 	1
Keith, 248. c Ibid. 244. 	1
Keith, 273, and Append. 159. 	1
Keith, 283. .- d Ibid. Append. 160. 	1
Keith, 289. 292. 298. 	1
Keith, 306. By the places of rendezvous, appointed for the inhabitants of 	1
Keith, 3 15. ' Ibid. 113. 	1
Keith, 335. . Ibid. 336. Append. 139. Melv. 138. 	1
Keith, 351, 352. Ibid. Append. 133. d Knox, 400. 	1
Keith, 354. Append. 136. " Keith, 357. 	1
Keith, 355. 	1
Keith, 420, 421, 422. 582. 	1
Keith, 425. Keith, 425. note (b). Melv. 169. 	1
Keith, 496. Append. 190, 191. See Append. No. IV. 	1
Keith, 498. d Spots. 152. 	1
Keith, 562. f Ibid. 152. ? Ibid. 251. 	1
Keith, 76. It is plain, that he suspected the French of having some inten- 	1
keith, although not yet of age; for in Scotland a li- 	1
Keith, App. 74, etc. 	1
Keith, Append. 160. b Keith, 283. Knox, 373. 	1
Keith, Append. 160. i Ibid. 169. Ibid. 295. Melv. 114. 	1
Keith, Append. 20. But the conspirators against Rizio bound themselves 	1
Keith, Append. 21. 	1
Keith, Pref. viii. n Good. vol. ii. 8. 	1
Keith's Append. 126. Whether we embrace the one or the other of these 	1
Keith's Hist, of Scotl. 30. 	1
Kelso and Melross, two of the most wealthy foundations 	1
kept alive their hopes and their courage ; but, at last, 	1
kept as hostages by Henry till the queen's arrival at his 	1
kept under such restraint, as to prevent her from dis- 	1
k Essays on Brit. Antiq. Ess. ii. Dalrymp. Hist, of Feud. Prop. ch. 8. 	1
k Haynes, 484. ' Anders, vol. iv. part ii. 115. 	1
killed the horse of a gentleman who rode on his other 	1
killed. The regent and his principal officers rode 	1
kind, failed of producing this effect, the ecclesiastics 	1
kind in the practice of irregular war, often made suc- 	1
kindred the sums to which they were respectively en- 	1
kind, written by sir William Cecil with his own hand, 	1
king and queen. For this purpose, sir James Sandi- 	1
king and queen should not advance foreigners to places 	1
king ; and, under that pretence, he was arrested and 	1
king being then in his thirteenth year, the nobles agreed 	1
king communicated his resolution to be avenged of t( J n m 1 u I1 r g 1 . er 	1
kingdom. 	3
kingdom 1 . In order to remedy these evils, many per- 	1
kingdom 1 ." This maxim, Hales, an English lawyer, 	1
kingdom 4 . 	1
kingdom, and his followers crowded to their chief in 	1
kingdom, and in a few places only were formed into re- 	1
kingdom, and permitted its kings to exercise powers 	1
kingdom; and the nobles were determined to guard 	1
kingdom, dreaded the growing dominion of such a 	1
kingdom, formidable on account of his own power, and 	1
kingdom gained great credit; and Lesley beheld with 	1
kingdom he had led them. Provoked by these repeat- 	1
kingdom". If it should happen, that what her accusers 	1
kingdom in a few days ; in war, success depends upon 	1
kingdom in an enterprise so dangerous and unneces- 	1
kingdom more illustrious than Scotland. Elizabeth had 	1
kingdom no representatives appeared. In the name of 	1
kingdom ; nor were they sufficiently skilful in the art 	1
kingdom of Europe, to a degree almost incredible, and 	1
kingdom open to the English, and, in a short time, the 	1
kingdom, out of which, not many hours before, he was 	1
kingdoms. 	1
kingdoms. But this too was mere affectation. Mary 	1
kingdoms, by the rage of the popish clergy, and was 	1
kingdoms has rendered a matter of mere curiosity. 	1
kingdoms, she commanded her French soldiers to re- 	1
kingdoms was established on its ancient foundation. 	1
kingdoms where the feudal government was establish- 	1
kingdom ; that a vessel was hired for this purpose, and ~ 	1
kingdom, that no discouragement or severity could 	1
kingdom; that she would celebrate the baptism of the 	1
kingdom. The influence of this example reached Scot- 	1
kingdom was thrown soon after, made it impossible for 	1
kingdom, whose concurrence was of the greatest im- 	1
kingdom with which he was at war, ordered them to be 	1
kingdom would strengthen the queen's party. Eliza- 	1
king, enforced by proper threatenings, in order to work 	1
king engaged to prevent the attainder of the banished 	1
king filled the nation with astonishment and with hor- 	1
king, forced him to resign the crown, and openly at- 	1
king found them obsequious to his will, and obtained 	1
king : he was adored by the people, who enjoyed un- 	1
king himself, the keeper of the great seals, the duke 	1
king intended to seize the person of the prince his son, 	1
king, intimidated by their boldness, prudently dropped 	1
king of England, cannot enjoy any inheritance in the 	1
king of Scots upon her husband, and commanding that 	1
king of Spain, she had fitted out a few ships of slender force, in order to 	1
king of the Scots, according to their own fabulous au- 	1
king, or would have laid waste their lands with fire 	1
king pitched upon this place, that he might enjoy the 	1
king's absence from the ceremony of his son's baptism. Keith, 360. 	1
king's accession to the throne was every where pro- 	1
kings and ministers thought themselves bound in con- 	1
kings. And the contending nobles, encouraged or pro- 	1
kings, and the zeal of many ages of ignorance, had be- 	1
king's brothers, two young men of turbulent and am- 	1
king's demesnes, beyond which his judges claimed in- 	1
king's eagerness to obtain liberty eluded all their vigi- 	1
king's father ; but that crime had been pardoned, and 	1
Kings, formerly elective, were then hereditary; and 	1
kings his successors exercised for some time, was within its territories. 	1
king's inability to carry these acts into execution, with- 	1
kings. In the rash and unfortunate battle of Flowden, 	1
kings of their own country, but, as possessing English 	1
king's party ; and the influence of the English queen, 	1
king's person were committed to sir William Crichton 	1
kings possessed in their parliaments, is a circumstance flu^e^f"" 	1
kings, resided almost constantly at every different court, 	1
king's sagacity, the vigilance of his ministers, and the 	1
kings were sensible of these limitations, and bore them 	1
king, than the governor of Scotland ; but the nobles 	1
king. This show of zeal gained reputation to them- 	1
king to obtain the crown matrimonial is not surprising, when the extent 	1
king was already great; though he made many bold 	1
king was the most limited of all princes. 	1
king, who now denied his knowledge of the conspiracy 	1
king, whose displeasure he had lately incurred, seconded 	1
king z . At the same time, all the acts of parliament 	1
Kirk of Field, in order to be present at a masque in 	1
Kirk of Field. It stood almost upon the same spot 	1
k It is not on the authority of Knox alone, that we charge the queen with 	1
K. Ja. VI. c. 31. In the same light of an important acquisition of security 	1
k Keith, 298. ' Ibid. Append. 108. 	1
K Melv. 48. Mm. de Castelnau, ap. Jfebb, vol. ii. 446. 	1
k Melv. Mem. 15. 	1
kmgs pur- ffa ^ ve an( j humbling the aristocracy, which may be con- 	1
knees, not to confide in Elizabeth's promises of gene- 	1
knew, they neither wanted power nor pretences to in- 	1
knew would never be granted u . Elizabeth urged her 	1
knights, appointed a privy council, named officers civil 	1
Knoi, 225. 	1
know how seldom and how slowly such wounds in do- 	1
knowledge and consent of parliament; that the forti- 	1
knowledge her as a superior, before whom she was 	1
knowledge, in the presence of the French and Spanish 	1
known and bigoted attachment to the popish religion, 	1
known, and extremely odious. Terrour and discontent 	1
known perfectly to understand the circumstances and 	1
known, procured me access to that noble collection, 	1
known ; the inquisitive genius of the age pressed for- 	1
known, to ascertain what was dubious, or to determine 	1
know when it would be printed, and to desire you to send 	1
Knox, 141. 	1
Knox, 184. 	1
Knox, 202. v Ibid. 203. 	1
Knox, 217. Haynes, 253, etc. Mm. de Castel. 450. 	1
Knox, 228. 	1
Knox, 259. 	1
Knox, 284. Haynes, 372. 	1
Knox, 307. 308. * Crawf. Officers of State, 56. 	1
Knox, 318. 3. His conduct was irresolute and wavering, like that of a 	1
Knox, 369. 373. Buchan. 339. Castelnau, who at that time was well 	1
Knox, 380. x Keith, Append. 164. 	1
Knox, 403. ' Id. ibid. 	1
Knox, Hist. 127, 128. 	1
Knox reason to repent of this commendable act of 	1
Knox tried Knox, who deemed the zeal of these persons laud- 	1
k Spotswood, 153. ' Ibid. 174. 	1
k The violence of national hatred between the English and Scots, in the 	1
k This conspiracy of the earl of Huntly is one of the most intricate and 	1
lace ; to be treated with no respect, and to be deprived 	1
lady for a translator, a woman of merit, the widow of an advo- 	1
laid, conducted with so much art, and supported both 	1
laid in ruins q . 	1
laid in ruins. We are apt, at this distance of time, to 	1
lake. Douglas, to whom it belonged, was a near rela- 	1
lanced all the advantages which he derived from the 	1
lance. He escaped from Falkland, and fled to the 	1
lance of her keeper, they held a close correspondence 	1
land. a f ew j avg k e f ore . 	1
land, a monarch could possess little authority, and exer- 	1
land, and a wish his majesty had expressed to see a 	1
land. And Chiapini Vitelli, one of Alva's ablest of- 	1
land, and did not imprint much reverence in the minds 	1
land, and foresaw, how little she would be able to resist 	1
land, and himself remain excluded from any share in the 	1
land, and the happy effects of ecclesiastical liberty in 	1
land, a person who married an heiress, kept possession 	1
land at Aberdeen ; and, as the protestant doctrines had 	1
land, a village only ten miles distant, they were able to 	1
land became more difficult, and any prospect of mak- 	1
land. But, while his troops impatiently expected the 	1
land during Elizabeth's life and the lives of her poste- 	1
landed it, without opposition, a few miles from Leith. 	1
land'. From that period, every step of his conduct 	1
land had been established; and he could not think of 	1
land. He found it no difficult matter to bring about a 	1
land, his principal adversaries. The time and place 	1
land. I cannot imagine why he should delay the publication 	1
land, in favour of the captive queen, with so much suc- 	1
land. Of all these the curators of that library were 	1
land, on a basis so broad and strong, as all the efforts 	1
land, on his return to his native country, Elizabeth, 	1
land or Scotland. Philip le bel abolished this practice in France, a. d. 	1
land precisely in the same situation in which she had 	1
land ; pretending that the kingdom was held as a fief 	1
landscape, decked with the ornaments of spring. He 	1
lands of Calder lord St. John was appointed to repair 	1
land's protection, they put an end to their ineffectual 	1
lands, should be granted in time to come, without the 	1
lands, were three : one, when his eldest son was made 	1
lands, which they parcelled out among their followers, 	1
land. The anxiety which the queen expressed for re- 	1
land. The danger of a foreign invasion obliged James 	1
land. The influence of the duke in the north of Eng- 	1
land. the nobility. Nature has placed no barrier between 	1
land. The regent and cardinal little expected such a 	1
land. The ruin of this great family, which had so long 	1
land, the Scots were obliged to assist Elizabeth with 1560. 	1
land. They contain several curious particulars, not mentioned by the 	1
land, thinking that establishment would open a wider 	1
land. This they considered only as an honorary title ; 	1
land to languish. The recovery of the Boulonnois was 	1
land to reinforce his army with a considerable body of 	1
land. Towards the end of the thirteenth century, this 	1
land was great. The earls of Northumberland and 	1
land, were likewise of considerable weight with Murray. 	1
land were turned upon him, as the father of their future 	1
land, when conquered by the Saxons, being divided by 	1
land, which gave birth to events of the most fatal con- regard to 	1
land, which ruined his own interest, without promoting 	1
land, who applied to those in power, in order to pre- 	1
land, without any security but the word of a prince, 	1
language. 	1
language which they deemed suitable to the necessity 	1
lar disposition of providence, the persons who opposed 	1
lar government, such a breach of public peace and order 	1
larity among his countrymen. Numbers of the banditti 	1
larity in their constitution and laws demonstrates that re jg n . 	1
larly the expulsion of the French troops out of Scot- 	1
last article in the treaty of Edinburgh, and even ex- 	1
last, cease from struggling any longer in a contest so 	1
last published are at present in the press. She has a very 	1
last will, whereby he was empowered to settle the order 	1
las, was the first victim to their barbarous policy. That 	1
lated by I know not whom from the French. I could do 	1
lated on purpose to strengthen his party, and to pro- 	1
lated upon any consideration whatsoever, seem to have 	1
lately much flattered with the praise of Dr. Blair, and a 	1
late with her, concerning this change towards severity, 	1
Latin and Greek authors ; this practice has been often 	1
lating my history. This account of Helvetius engaged me to 	1
lation, in a matter concerning which her sentiments 	1
lations, as tended to the welfare of their small society ; 	1
lative too often, which is a colloquial barbarism, as 	1
latory, when they entered on the consideration of eccle- 	1
Laurea at Paris' 1 . The convulsions into which the~ 	1
law, and laid little stress upon professions of friendship, 	1
law, but by violence. The offended baron, without 	1
law, he was obliged to receive it. A second attempt to 	1
law of attainder against Huntly was repealed, and he 	1
laws allowed such full scope to the revenge of one 	1
laws, nor tried by the same judges 2 . Every guard, that 	1
laws of the kingdom, favoured Bruce, each of the rivals 	1
laws operate slowly on a rude people, and that the 	1
laws, were better established, and become more uni- 	1
laws which the clergy themselves had framed. The 	1
law, took pleasure in mortifying the one, and in disap- 	1
lay in England, and, by means of this pledge, she 	1
laying their pikes over their foregoers' shoulders, that, if they do assail un- 	1
lay in the river Clyde ready to receive him . The last 	1
lay near at hand, and were both numerous and full of 	1
lce&gt; cardinal, his brother, upon the accession of Francis 	1
leader might claim, as his own, the territory which his 	1
leaders . 	1
leaders, in separate prisons, and obliged the duke to ~" 	1
leaders of the congregation to take arms, was not the 	1
leaders of the party, remained at Perth ; the multitude 	1
leaders of the popish faction seem to have taken some y^n m fo'J" t 	1
learning and the learned are here, from what they are among 	1
least appearance of danger to their religion, to reas- 	1
least bear the most distant insinuation of contempt, were 	1
least interesting, will meet with, I flatter myself that your 	1
least, to a very distant period. In a very few days (before 	1
least two years to bring that work to perfection ; and 	1
leave the particular books to your own choice, which you'll 	1
lected; and Scotland remained the only avenue by 	1
lected, that could express the duty and affection of the 	1
lected to mention it. Le Croc's first letter is dated December 2, some time 	1
lections were published. By consulting them, I have 	1
lect, so that he appeared in every place without the 	1
lect, with insolence, and with brutality. All these she 	1
lect with which she was treated by the queen-mother, 	1
ledge as a philosopher, which enabled him to cure his 	1
ledge becomes more extensive, changes must neces- 	1
ledged, openly in parliament, that their behaviour to- 	1
ledged the receipt of the present in a short letter, 	1
ledge of the conspiracy against Rizio, the queen was 	1
ledge the dependence of the Scottish upon the Eng- 	1
ledge which strangers have of the affairs of Scotland, 	1
ledging his authority. 	1
ledgment of her title, Mary would be more at liberty to 	1
ledgment of its validity ; she granted her consent merely 	1
led her, Mary was brought to yield a point, which for- 	1
led upon English ground. But though James himself 	1
leers, who served the enemy, and to their cannon, which 	1
left destitute of the necessaries of life. Westmorland 	1
left for invention to occupy ; each nation, with a vanity 	1
left several others a burthen upon the crown, they were 	1
legally or certainly known to Lennox sooner than ten or twelve days before 	1
legal means, his son and Crichton pursued with the im- 	1
legends, and the traditions of their bards, still more 	1
Leicester had been more favourably received. 	1
Leicester, lord Clinton, and sir William Cecil h . The 	1
Leicester's own situation was extremely delicate and 	1
Leicester, who perhaps had countenanced the project 	1
leisure to attend to the affairs of Scotland, and wished 	1
Leith. The queen, conscious of her present advanta- 	1
Leith, till the princes of Lorrain should make good the 	1
lence ; they dealt out the patrimony of the church 	1
lence were committed. The church was suffered to 	1
lence which was fatal to their cause. They deemed it 	1
lence with which this indignation would burst out, 	1
length, an advantage which they did not fail to im- 	1
length. Hamilton manuscripts, vol. iii. p. 38. 	1
length of its duration. Many years after the declension 	1
lenity. 	1
lenity z . 	1
Lennox and his son, if they were delivered at that place. His answer was, 	1
Lennox as a prisoner, first in her own house, and then 	1
Lennox, however, in consequence of the license Scotland. 	1
Lennox Lennox at the same time incited Mary to ven- 	1
Lennox's impatience for revenge got the start of the 	1
Lennox's pretensions ; that his own legitimacy depended 	1
Lennox's return, from an apprehension that he would 	1
Lennox, whose return from France he had earnestly 	1
lent declarations against Darnly, there was much more 	1
lent friend of that country; still mindful of my British 	1
lentinois, recovered that ascendant over the spirit of 	1
lently hated. It was Both well's interest, who had the 	1
lently the current of national favour ran towards the re- 	1
lent measures they were driving on, took care to place 	1
lent mind, shrinking from the contemplation of facts, 	1
lent opponents of the king's government were forfeited ; 	1
lent passions, some eruption was unavoidable. 	1
lent to the crown for its claims, amounted to no consi- 	1
Lesley, 215. Castelnau, ap. Jebb, vol. ii. 446. 473. 	1
Lesley, ap. Jebb, vol. i. 231. P Keith, 94. 	1
less accusation, prevailed to have Melvil*, a Scottish 	1
less address ; of great intrepidity, and equal prudence ; 	1
lesser barons, appeared in parliament. The ordinary 	1
lesser barons were roused from their inactivity, and 	1
lesser barons, who formed no inconsiderable body, this 	1
less exasperated against him. But whether he and the 	1
less extensive, in proportion to that of the civil magis- 	1
less it suits their own conveniency." 	1
lessly delayed your publication till the first of February, at 	1
less offensive garb, and threw in so many limitations, as 	1
less offensive remedy of laws and statutes. In a par- 	1
less remote, or even of contemporary historians. 	1
less reserve, had openly supported Mary's rebellious 	1
less rigorous towards Mary, might have been found for 	1
less skilful in the practice of irregular war, we may conclude that the da- 	1
less than the zeal of Knox towards demolishing the 	1
les yeux. II me fait oublier tous mes maux. C'est a 	1
Let him only demand that the matter should be 	1
Lethington seemed to hold the first place in the queen's 	1
Let Murray and his confederates be as ambitious as we can suppose, they 	1
letter, as well as from the intelligence of your most 	1
letter did not reach her commissioners in due time, or 	1
letter, March the twenty-fourth, invited Lennox to come to Edinburgh the 	1
letter of that gentleman and the earl of Bedford of the twenty- 	1
letter, sent to me by Mr. Andrew Stuart : I am very proud 	1
letters kept by the regent Lennox during his adminis- 	1
letters to the queen, from almost every place where 	1
letter to Mary, containing the most salutary advices 	1
letter to the Scottish queen, written with Leicester's 	1
levied and maintained by princes at small charge. The 	1
levied on them, the inhabitants grew into estimation, 	1
levied on the towns of St. Andrew's, Perth, and Dun- 	1
levm. a manner no less surprising to her friends, than un- 	1
Lewis boldly added to the crown whatever he wrested 	1
liable to be retracted by the same power which had 	1
liament discovered in its proceedings. The most vio- 	1
liament, etc. 4to. edit. p. 17, etc. 	1
liament, held immediately after his return, he gained 	1
liament, of a certain number of persons, whom he dis- 	1
liament proceeded against this great family with the 	1
liament, seven of which council to be elected by the 	1
liament's proceedings. From the princes of Lorrain, 	1
liament. To suffer its validity now to be called in 	1
liance of the great families, by frequent intermarriages, 	1
liar and only province. 	1
liar government and laws. The latter may enable us to 	1
liar to ourselves has thrown almost an equal obscurity 	1
liar to that form of government direct all its operations, and determine the 	1
liar to the Austrian blood ; and, in executing them, he 	1
libels, diverted them from searching for the murderers 	1
liberations, the regent did not neglect to improve the ent against 	1
liberties of the kingdom were threatened ; and that the 	1
liberties. They trembled at the thoughts of a match 	1
liberty ; and, besides the pious indignation which they 	1
liberty, and promised to assist them in such an attempt 	1
liberty, and Scotland might be exposed to the danger 	1
liberty, as the reward of their success. In the mean 	1
lic and conspicuous theatre. The scene in which he 	1
lic greatly ; and was only to be acquired (if at all) by the 	1
licited him to become a member of the church of Eng- 	1
lic laws, and, arming against the person who had in- 	1
licly recognised. She observed, however, a mysterious 1563. 	1
licly to enjoy the liberty of professing those opinions, 	1
lic transactions of the nation to the judgment of fo- 	1
lie in my power to facilitate it by some means or other. 	1
liend, we shall differ. There remain, however, two other 	1
lies fell, and new ones rose upon their ruins ; the rights 	1
lies who had served him with fidelity, and he chose 	1
lieutenant or warden of all the marches, an office among 	1
lieutenant, were vested in him for this purpose. 	1
lieve, he would think inconsistent with the attention 	1
life, and shortened the days of the Scottish queen. 	1
LIFE AND WRITINGS 	1
life. But several noblemen, of the greatest distinction, 	1
life of Elizabeth, and the lives of her posterity; if, in 	1
life when his countrymen of the same quality were fol- 	1
lifications of learning, and more extensive views, than 	1
lifications which raise affection and procure esteem. 	1
liged him to accept of Henry's offers, and be reconciled 	1
liged to abandon him, he retired to the Orkney isles. 	1
liged to conduct themselves with the utmost caution, 	1
liged to suppress what passed in her bosom, and to 	1
light, and have drawn characters with new colours, I 	1
lights in all those tender offices which sooth and alle- 	1
light y. 	1
ligion had afforded many of the dignified ecclesiastics 	1
ligiously kept ; and it is my intention to keep it till the 	1
lii DR. ROBERTSON'S 	1
likely to continue to have much weight with you." .... 	1
like men who had given up all concern either for their 	1
likewise be passed over slightly. A prince of a mean lr ' 	1
likewise her subject ; and again to involve Mary in all 1565. 	1
likewise more turbulent, than those of the preceding the fiftllt 	1
likewise the grandson of the princess Mary. But his father having married 	1
liking of two young persons. Lord Darnly was at this 	1
limited. The more considerable nobles were themselves 	1
limited. WaS feudal system, as has been already observed, the king's 	1
line from their ancient monarchs. She herself was the 	1
ling, and entered into an association for the defence 	1
Linlithgow, met the queen on her return near that April 24. 	1
linquent, a punishment which, it is well known, Milton 	1
lion? ( a been sa id f the state of religion. While the war with 	1
lips. 	1
lished among the laws enacted in a parliament held 	1
lished manners, surrounded with vassals, bold and H- among* the 	1
lished nation. 	1
lished nations in Europe. But it is to be observed, in 	1
lished their histories of Scotland, the former a succinct 	1
lished with great applause ; adding, that the subject was 	1
lish fleet, or, in case of tempestuous weather, to secure 	1
lish fleet, they could render it difficult for any foreign 	1
lish had the choice of what prisoners they pleased to 	1
lishing two new editions of that book, one in quarto, and an- 	1
lish invested Leith. The garrison shut up within the 	1
lish it in the new edition, and of a note which I shall add to 	1
lish liberty. His other passions contributed no less to- 	1
lish monarchs, satisfied with their legal and uncontro- 	1
lish nation. In return for this, Murray was to be de- 	1
lish resident, a man otherwise shrewd and penetrating. 	1
lish style ; a task, of which the difficulty must be greatly 	1
lish. The Scots, instead of seconding his attempt, were 	1
lish to evacuate Haddingtoun, and to surrender several 	1
listen, being unwilling to oppose his friend Hume in 	1
listened to the solicitations of the French monarch with 	1
listening to her offers, the protestants continued the 	1
listen to all their advices with a filial respect. The 	1
literary club instituted in 1754, in Edinburgh. The 	1
literary debate ; it was projected by Allan Ramsay, the 	1
literary plans, I can add nothing to what you will soon read 	1
litics, by teaching them how to balance the power of 	1
lition was reserved to a distant and more happy pe- 	1
little after to see Millar, and told him the story ; consulting 	1
little difficulty, whatever was transacted at Edinburgh 	1
little disturbance as possible. The French officers too, 	1
little value, as to be almost neglected. It appears from 	1
lity, and by adding new property and power to the com- 	1
lity, have decided whether the house of Stuart or of 	1
liv DR. ROBERTSON'S 	1
lived amidst their nobles, was raised for the king's de- 	1
lived triumph, by informing them, that it was the fleet 	1
live here in such a beastly liberty, that they neither regard God nor go- 	1
live here very privately, and avoid as much as possible (and 	1
liver her up, provided good security were given, " that she 	1
lives and fortunes, could not even obtain the favour of 	1
lives, or disguising their vices, they affected to despise 	1
living together not in the hallowed bonds of matrimony, but in a state of 	1
loaded the reformed religion ; and the peevishness and 	1
load it, the privy council transmitted a narrative of this 	1
London, 12th March, 1759. 	1
London, 19th March, 1767. 	1
London, 29th May, 1759. 	1
London, 2nd July, 1791. 	1
London, 8th February, 1759. 	1
London ? But I give you warning that you will find the 	1
London, Feb. 8th, 1759. 	1
London, Lisle-street, 18th Nov. 1758. 	1
London, September 1, 1783. 	1
long and affectionately remembered among the com- 	1
long, and which were wrought almost into the frame of 	1
long distract and weaken Mary's councils. Her busi- 	1
longer, and more frequent, than ever happened in any 	1
longer preserved her accustomed moderation, but, with 	1
longer time, and required to be treated with a more 	1
long expected, arrived about this time, Mary was ob- 	1
long letter to the queen, representing, in the strongest concerning 	1
long my home. I feel little inclination to the factious barba- 	1
long proof against his fear. He publicly abjured the 	1
long sickness had given him. Three or four of his 	1
long. Suard will be embarrassed with them, as the 	1
long to his department. Unhappily I have but a slight ac- 	1
long to so little purpose ; after having been fooled and 	1
looked. As it was the mode of the times to exhibit 	1
looked forward, says his biographer, to the active share 	1
looked like a step taken on purpose to mortify and to 	1
looked or supplied any defect in the form of these acts 	1
lopping off a third of their revenues was by no means 	1
Lord Erskine, Mar's uncle, was at that time governor 	1
lord Erskine to divert them from this enterprise. But 	1
lord first allowed the sentiments of a lover to occupy 	1
lord Hamilton, whom James the third created earl of Arran, on that ac- 	1
lord Home, Kirkaldy, and several of his former as- 	1
Lord Ruthven happening to be the first person who 	1
Lord Ruthven, the principal actor in the conspiracy 	1
lords Hamilton, Balveny, and other powerful barons ; 	1
Lord Sheffield's, Downing-street, 	1
lordship. As I have begun the History of Charles the 	1
lordship last week, I unluckily did not advert to the hurry 	1
lordship to peruse it, and if in any part it meets not with 	1
lordship will go on with the work. Allow me, on the public 	1
lords of articles were the tools and creatures of the king. This practice, so 	1
lords, of eight representatives of boroughs, and of the 	1
lords of the queen's faction ; Glasgow was a large and 	1
lords, to consent to their return into Scotland, to ob- 	1
lords who possessed authority there, were apt to forget 	1
Lord Willoughby, who had been there reading some passages 	1
lor, or a friend, under the pressure of distress and the 	1
Lorrain. distinguished by being vast and unbounded. Though 	1
Lorrain had formed against her crown, was early sensi- 	1
Lorrain had obliged the queen-mother to pursue. On 	1
lors, that he, suspecting his life to be in danger, with- 	1
losce plenum opus alecs tractas, et incedis per ignes 	1
lose. 	1
loses the su dden and violent passion which raised him to the 	1
losing a moment, put her troops in motion ; but the zeal 	1
losopher, and engage him to reject what he has anew applied 	1
loss on whom to bestow her protection. Before the 1 *" 	1
Lothian. She arrived there that night, without being 	1
loudly of the indignity with which he had been treated ; 	1
loudly than ever with declamations against idolatry; 	1
lous as Throkmorton was to accomplish this, all his 	1
lousies and fears. These they uttered to the people, in 	1
lousies of Elizabeth, and to quiet the fears of her own 	1
lously attached to the reformed doctrine, and deeply engaged in all the in- 	1
lously embraced an opinion, that this testament, which 	1
lous protestant, the most powerful and most universally 1669. 	1
lousy, and the new earl's power and resentment, pre- 	1
lousy be raised by repeated injuries, are always ready 	1
lousy of national honour, and pride of independence, 	1
lousy with which he observed her actions, and the in- 	1
love inflamed by disappointment, and his impatience 	1
love of Bothwell. 	1
love of ease extinguished the former, the gentleness of 	1
love those courts, in which they appeared with such 	1
love to his people, zeal for the punishment of private 	1
love to Mary, and MelviFs replies in the name of his 	1
love would be apt to represent whatever soothed her 	1
lowed that accession of property, as would have raised 	1
lowers, but with a stronger disposition to redress their 	1
lowers by piracy. Kirkaldy and Murray of Tullibardin 	1
lowers. Instructions for this purpose were sent from 	1
lowers, Mary would have been inexcusable had she 	1
lowers on horseback. He was once more constrained 	1
lowers, that rendered the Douglases great. The no- 	1
lowers, they advanced together towards Leith. The 	1
lowers, was, in effect, debarring the nobles from all 	1
lowest classes of the people assembled by appointment 	1
lowing the pleasures of the chase, or serving as adven- 	1
low the ordinary tenour of the printed historian, while you 	1
luctance to drive him, and considered his zeal and 	1
luments of his office ; the people reverenced and loved 	1
lumes little can be gleaned, either from the traditions 	1
lurking among the marshes of Liddesdale, infested the 	1
lustre. History, which ought to record truth and to 	1
lute authority, were now deaf to all their remonstrances. 	1
lution, and availed herself of it. She employed all her escape&lt; 	1
lutions might have been taken, with regard to the 	1
LXr. Robertson, by his office in the university of 	1
lying on this alone, entered a solemn protestation to secure his own right. 	1
Lyon Office, p. 148. 	1
m 	1
M 	1
macy of his birth, by the practice of all civilized nations, 	1
made a rapid progress among all ranks of men. 	1
made. Encouraged by the facility with which he had 	1
made his escape from his guards, and returned to take 	1
made it necessary to appoint judges, who, in the king's 	1
made it necessary to take arms in order to dissolve it ; 	1
made more early, they did not doubt that it might 	1
made no considerable progress in that part of the king- 	1
made, than be deprived of the advantage that I shall reap 	1
made their escape. 	1
made their full impression on him. But, without offend- 	1
made them bear with admirable fortitude. 	1
made them, the French ambassador agreed to insert 	1
made to Henry by the English wardens of the marches for the year 1544, 	1
made to procure her an opportunity of escaping, which 	1
made to produce the most ample and undoubted evi- 	1
made to slice, that as I never saw none so good, so I think it hard to devise 	1
made upon her was visible from the time of their first 	1
made use of as occasion might require, she wished that 	1
Madrid ; this compliment, however, one of his biogra- 	1
magazines with arms and ammunition. Having taken 	1
mage which they did in England was not inconsiderable ; and that their 	1
magnificence displayed by her on this occasion ex- 	1
magnificent promises of assistance, with which they 	1
main ambiguous and controverted, rather than submit 	1
main battle far behind. The encounter of the spear- 	1
main, I fear, many errors, of which you could have convinced 	1
mains in manuscript, in the possession of the church 	1
maintaining themselves on the throne which some of 	1
maintain y . Nor was the interest of religion forgotten 	1
main two original letters with regard to this conspiracy ; one from Randolph 	1
Maitland, and Kirkaldy, the persons among the confe- 	1
Maitland endeavoured to amuse Elizabeth, by apologiz- 	1
Maitland, Mary's ambassador, or by Randolph, her obstruct it. 	1
Maitland owed this distinction to the regent's fear, 	1
Maitland publicly accused Knox of teaching seditious 	1
Maitland's command q . The loss of a place of so much 	1
Maitland the regent chiefly dreaded. He had laid the plan of 	1
Maitland, were the contrivers of it. In all former com- 	1
Maitland, who accompanied Throkmorton, to return 	1
majesty all matter of claim, and unto the heirs of her body; and in con- 	1
majesty doubteth not ye will use, that your enemies take no advantage of 	1
majesty's hands. This is the effect of his credence, with sundry other 	1
majesty's servants in London, a fair state of the senti- 	1
majesty, which attemplate, he saith, they would enterprize, if they knew 	1
make a figure in debate ; and much more fitted for 	1
make her treatment of the Scottish queen look like the 	1
make his appearance there, he met with such a cold 	1
make me averse to see you in his hands. 	1
make the different parts bear on each other. 	1
making an impression on a heart of such a frame as 	1
maladministration, she determined to set on foot a 	1
malecontents, no symptoms of general discontent ap- 	1
malecontents retired. In their retreat their numbers 	1
male jealousy increased the violence of their political 	1
malicious pleasure of reproaching Rizio with his crimes 	1
man, a.d. 1100. I believe that no example of a king's doing homage 	1
management of affairs. He possessed, in an eminent 	1
man and a stranger was advanced to the supreme au- 	1
man, and child, to fire and sword, without exception, when any resistance 	1
man ; and therefore it were meet that his adversaries should both have an 	1
man, capable of the most atrocious and desperate ac- 	1
man catholic. The situation of Perth, a place, at that 	1
m And. Coll. vol. i. pref. 40. 	1
manded from the justice of another p . 	1
manded her army to move. Their intention was, to 	1
manded his guards to seize Chatelherault in his own 	1
manded not only the redress of their religious griev- 	1
manded of the citizens of Edinburgh, by way of loan. 	1
manded them to be strictly confined. Under any regu- 	1
manded the rest to be burned a . An universal oblivion 	1
mander in chief of his majesty's forces. As soon as 	1
m Anders, vol. i. 128. 134. Melv. 163. See Appendix, No. XXI. 	1
m Anders, vol. iv. partii. 11. 45. Hayues, 487. 	1
m Anders, vol. iv. part ii. 119. 	1
man disconcerted by an unforeseen danger, not like one executing a con- 	1
mands ad- 	1
mands of a minor. The royal authority was circum- 	1
mands upon their own sovereigns for redress, employed 	1
mands was signed by himself alone, without communi- 	1
mand there, and were intrusted with a discretionary 	1
mand. The young queen, the dauphin, and the king "age treaty, 	1
mand, was granted in the name of Francis and Mary, 	1
man e ; she resolved, however, to prevent this dangerous 	1
man heart, nor in the ingratitude of the queen's dispo- 	1
manifested by signing his name, no public deed seems to have been con- 	1
manity, the protestants left to others the office of re- 	1
man Lesly, the eldest son of the earl of Rothes, had 	1
manner and form in which she should extend her favour 	1
manner, and retiring to his father at Glasgow. 	1
manner in which she received this ill-timed proposal of 	1
manners, and courtly address, were the accomplishments 	1
manners commanded general respect. To all the charms 	1
manner suitable to her dignity, as the queen of two 	1
manner that both published the contempt, under which 	1
man of genius and s enterprise, a native of France, and 	1
man of genius, however wild and extravagant. The king, 	1
man of honour. His elevation to such unexpected 	1
man still preserved his neutrality, and, by his integrity, 	1
manuscript account of her trial in lord Royston's possession. 	1
manuscript is not farther legible.) But though such were 	1
man who doted on him to distraction. His insolence 	1
man, whom fear or ambition might have prompted to 	1
many after it; the whole fabric, which ignorance and 	1
many among her subjects ; the address with which she 	1
many, and although the greater part of its princes have become absolute, 	1
many avocations Dr. Robertson still found leisure to 	1
many causes contributed to bring government earlier to 	1
many concurring causes are sufficient, perhaps, to ac- 	1
many counties. He fell, at last, upon the true secret 	1
many digressions and reflections. This was also somewhat 	1
many disputes and much contradiction. Some deny that any design was 	1
many expressions of a resolution never to permit a 	1
many expressions of duty and submission towards them, 	1
many generations with unmitigated rancour. It was the 	1
many injuries provoked the most considerable nobles 	1
many letters and lovetokens were exchanged between 	1
many more, they were brought to approve of all the 	1
Many of the clergy, on the other hand, were distin- 	1
many of the clergy, who, presuming too much upon the 	1
many of the duke's dependents having been killed or 	1
Many of the elements of science and of literature, for- 	1
many of the Italians, the imposture and absurdity of 	1
Many of them appeared wavering and irresolute ; others 	1
many of the separate jurisdictions possessed by the 	1
many pageants at every public solemnity, most of these, 	1
many parts of your history with that fresh concern and 	1
many passages in my works. When he had finished, his 	1
many political intrigues, and had moved and interested 	1
many possessed their lands by titles extremely defective. 	1
many protestations of obedience and loyalty towards 	1
many secret murmurs and cabals. The partisans of the 	1
many small states, the luxury of the people, and their 	1
many things still require the investigation of such an accurate 	1
many vast projects were laid open to an aspiring mind, 	1
many years had rendered the nobles independent. Uni- 	1
March 12, 	1
March 15. proceeded the famous conspiracy of Amboise; and, 	1
March 19. her terms. The conspirators against Rizio, deprived 	1
March 24, monarch and his allies. England consented to restore 	1
March 26, 1788. 	1
March 5th, 1787. 	1
March, but I shall communicate to him your desire, even 	1
marched along with them, rode with loaded pistols y , 	1
marched with flying colours along the streets of Edin- 	1
marched with some troops towards the borders, to pre- 	1
Marches 	1
March, had taken arms against Robert the third, the 	1
marked out by them for immediate destruction f ; and 	1
marked them out to be the first victims of their indig- 	1
Market-towns 5 	1
mark of independence; such slow proceedings were 	1
mark of violence. 	1
marks of an infant and unformed society. The mem- 	1
marks of distinction are, in their own nature, either 	1
marks of jealousy and distrust should appear in such 	1
marks of my friends, and the strictures of those who differ 	1
marks, " that this is one of the most melancholy pas- 	1
marriage, and determined not to abandon a man, for 	1
marriage, and wished the crown to descend in the right mt 	1
marriage, the queen's fondness for Darnly continued. She soon proved 	1
marriage these contrary factions, she endeavoured to establish it 	1
marriage with Leicester should take place, to advance 	1
marriage with the duke of Norfolk. 	1
marriage with the Scottish queen to be a project for 	1
married Philip the second of Spain. To the perse- 	1
marrying. Her jealousy kept the question with regard 	1
marrying r 	1
marry, or by consenting to an act, establishing the or- 	1
Mar sum- P erson against her foreign and domestic enemies k . She 	1
Mary, and how prejudicial it might be to her preten- 	1
Mary, and so blindly zealous for her service, as to be- 	1
Mary and to her commissioners, and neglected no ar- 	1
Mary, and when the proofs in support of it were ready 	1
Mary as a prisoner would excite universal indignation 	1
Mary at last intimated to Randolph, that, on condition 	1
Mary at Lochlevin. This visit, to a sister, and a queen, 	1
Mary attentively weighed the pretensions of so many Mary's de- 	1
Mary began to entertain in his favour 5 . It was entirely 	1
Mary began to suspect the design of this second con- Mary's sus- 	1
Mary, but to renounce any title to the crown of Eng- 	1
Mary, by a new declaration of disgust at her conduct. ? nte ^ p r ses 	1
Mary continued to attend the king with the mostHeismur- 	1
Mary could not with decency reject a proposition so 	1
Mary de- 	1
Mary demanded a personal interview with the queen, 	1
Mary empowered Lesley, bishop of Ross, lord Li- 	1
Mary en- Nothing could be more mortifying to Mary, than 	1
Mary en- While this matter remained in suspense in both 	1
Mary gained by the comparison, she envied and hated 	1
Mary had appointed her lieutenants, the one in the 	1
Mary had been educated, contribute to increase or to 	1
Mary had hitherto relied with unaccountable ere- Mary 	1
Mary had now continued above two years in a state Negotia- 	1
Mary had written to Bothwell were produced, and she 	1
Mary herself soon became sensible of her errour. 	1
Mary herself, though highly incensed, was not inexor- 	1
Mary herself understood it; and, in her answer to a let- 	1
Mary, however, continued to treat him as if he had 	1
Mary, in a long conference with Throkmorton, the 	1
Mary, in her letter, demanded that her marriage with 	1
Mary justly considered as an open declaration of that 	1
Mary laboured to extinguish the domestic feuds which 	1
Mary n . 	1
Mary of Guise possessed the same bold and aspiring The queen 	1
Mary of having been accessory to this unnatural crime ; 	1
Mary, passionately devoted to the interest of France, 	1
MARY, queen of Scots, the daughter of James the Birth of 	1
Mary re- which her daughter-in-law was about to enter. Mary, 	1
Mary's. 	1
Mary saw how fatal this would prove to her reputation, 	1
Mary's chief object was the recovering of her former 	1
Mary's commissioners, that, in the present juncture, 	1
Mary, sensible, at the same time, of how much im- May 8. 	1
Mary's falling once more into the hands of France, 	1
Mary's first care was to offer some apology for her 	1
Mary. She was the daughter, Mary only the grand- 	1
Mary's honour, and solicitous that she should wipe off 	1
Mary's integrity : and though justified by the example 	1
Mary's letters to Bothwell, her sonnets, and all the 	1
Mary's letter to Bothwell, with the consequence which must 	1
Mary's life, and is certainly one of the most unjustifiable 	1
Mary's memory. 	1
Mary's person with great decency, and her title with 	1
Mary's return into Scotland, he served her with a zeal 	1
Mary Such was the favourable disposition of the nation 	1
Marysur- As soon as Bothwell retired, Mary surrendered to 	1
Mary, that this indulgence of Lennox might prove fa- 	1
Mary to be put into their hands, in order to try her and put 	1
Mary to the year, the tranquillity of her government had been dis- 	1
Mary turned with horrour from such a shocking sight. 	1
Mary was aware of all this ; and, in order to prevent 	1
Mary was received by her subjects with shouts and Arrives in 	1
Mary was removed to Coventry, a place of strength, 	1
Mary was so obviou's, that it could not fail of presenting itself to the view 	1
Mary was then at Seaton, whither she had retired 	1
Mary white. I am afraid that is impossible ; but his lordship 	1
Mary would discover any forwardness to grant the re- 	1
mask, and issued a mandate, summoning all the pro- before her. 	1
master of Rothes, the earl of Rothes' eldest son, and John Charteris, would 	1
masters. 	1
master. The duke of Chatelherault was the first to 	1
match. communicated her design, and the motives which de- 	1
match for Monluc's refinements in intrigue, and had 	1
match for their ardour and zeal. 	1
match ; she treated lady Lennox with so much rigour ; 	1
mate a young and noble mind. He loved magnificence, 	1
mated with zeal, and inflamed with resentment, they 	1
mated with zeal both for religion and liberty. The 	1
mate the inhabitants to defend the town against them. 	1
mating his schemes. The first step towards this was 	1
mation at different times, and from various motives ; 	1
mation having been represented, as the effect of some 	1
mation. He said that the act of parliament the first of James 	1
mation. The important day is now fixed to the eighth of 	1
mation, were almost universally remitted. Others, by 	1
matrimonial ' should be conferred upon him ; and that 	1
matter, but not very minute. I have in my possession Cal- 	1
matter of no small consequence to France. Henry, 	1
matter purely ecclesiastical. I flattered myself, that my 	1
matter so dark and mysterious, there was no proba- 	1
matter somewhat difficult, at least in the former city. A 	1
maxims by which she governed her own subjects, her 	1
maxims of his government, but the temper of his mind ; 1561. 	1
May 14. The convention of nobles, which was assembled a 	1
May 20. 	1
May 26. ' tne queen's return into Scotland. Mary's administra- 	1
May 28. after having been so long suppressed ; and, in order 	1
May 29. 	1
May 3, He was quickly master of that place ; and, marching 	1
May 7. they had lost in the former skirmish. Nor were the 	1
May, and it was chosen by Cadell, as it coincides with the 	1
may appear, it was formed and carried on under very 	1
may be discovered. He spoke out now in plain lan- 	1
may believe the common accounts, settled at first in 	1
may be sent soon, as the booksellers are impatient. I trust 	1
may go towards perverting or extinguishing moral prin- 	1
Mayi. In prosecution of this scheme, she laid before her 	1
may peruse. I find, however, some good judges profess a 	1
MB. GIBBON TO DR. ROBERTSON. 	1
MB. HUME TO Dn. ROBERTSON. 	1
m Buchan. 340. Melv. 107. n Melv. 111. 	1
m Buchanan and Knox are positive that the king had been poisoned. 	1
M. Castelnau, after condemning the dangerous councils of the princes 	1
MDCCCXXV. 	1
me, and place yourself directly under his feet. Do you ima- 	1
means ; and as soon as I had read them, I ran to Millar, and 	1
means of acquiring and spreading knowledge became 	1
means of that, Elizabeth might either have kept her rival 	1
Meantime, in order to preserve the reputation of im- 	1
meant to refuse the king's bounty, that he would be proud of 	1
meanwhile 	1
Meanwhile, Bothwell assembled his forces at Dun- 	1
Meanwhile, Elizabeth endeavoured to embarrass Elizabeth 	1
Meanwhile, Mary gave a public evidence of her own 	1
Meanwhile, she threw out some obscure hints, that a 	1
Meanwhile, the day appointed for the ratification of 	1
Meanwhile, the French gained more by the defeat of Forces the 	1
Meanwhile, their cause received reinforcement from 	1
Meanwhile, the queen regent, from whom no motion 	1
Meanwhile, they deliberated with the utmost anxiety Schemes of 	1
measure, by the manner of executing it, was rendered 	1
measure, coordinate with that of the queen ; and without his concurrence, 	1
measure more galling to Huntly than any the queen 	1
measure, quieted those suspicions which had so long 	1
measures. At a time, when deeds of violence were com- 	1
measures carrying on in Scotland; and, as it was the 	1
measures concerted, for exterminating the hugonots in 	1
measures during the first years of his administration ; 	1
measures of the queen regent, evidently proceeded from 	1
measure, the use of the language, and am falling into friend- 	1
measure which would have made it necessary for them 	1
meat fa- an d her other emissaries, were extremely active and 	1
me a volume of manuscripts in his possession, which 	1
me ; but now it sits more easy. I have recovered, in some 	1
mediate expulsion of them was, therefore, demanded 	1
mediately conceived for him a passion, which had all the symptoms of ge- 	1
mediate step from the discipline of the school to the 	1
meditated, or forgive the injuries intended against them. 	1
meditations of this excellent philosopher, who, to use 	1
meet, depended on their concurrence, she not only 	1
meetings and messages between the two earls. Eliza- 	1
meetings of parliament. The leaders of the congrega- October 21. 	1
meet the queen with superior force m . 	1
meet with prompt and full obedience. Laws and sub- 	1
me, every source of information which government can 	1
me, if we had canvassed the matter in conversation. Perhaps 	1
me in this affair was, that as I thought myself obliged to fol- 	1
me, is not obligatory on them." 	1
Melv. 156. According to Melvil, lord Herries likewise remonstrated 	1
Melv. 161. " Keith, 304. 	1
Melv. 168. 	1
Melv. 93, 94. k Ibid. 101. 	1
Melvil". But, lest so many precautions should excite 	1
Melvil received a letter from thence, which represent- 	1
Melvil's remonstrance must have happened some time before the meeting of 	1
Melvil was instantly despatched to London with an 	1
member, but still to hold some station in it, without 	1
membered, nor the performance of them exacted, un- 	1
membered with regret, and have rendered him the 	1
member of the French academy ; the translation I have 	1
members. A convention so feeble and irregular, could 	1
members, and was composed of lords spiritual and tem- 	1
Memoirs of King James the second, in fourteen volumes, all 	1
memorable and more tragical events. George Gordon, th . e queen's 	1
memory. She was frequently pensive and dejected* 1 . 	1
mency of the winter season, to attack the malecontents 	1
mency, the punishment was remitted. The first par- 	1
mended by common utility, and justified by universal 	1
mending to their sovereign a step so injurious to her 	1
mends Lei- war j s ear ] o f Leicester, was declared to be the happy 	1
men, entered deeply into all their cabals. The king 	1
men ever accomplished their ambitious projects by 	1
men, for the injuries which they had sustained during 	1
men from." Ib. 471. 	1
men had been long unaccustomed, inspired reverence: 	1
men, however, and three companies of foot, besides her 	1
men left at Perth was entirely composed of native Scots, 	1
Men of such characters ought, in reason, to have 	1
men of such opposite principles and parties, in recom- 	1
men of that order insisted, that this opportunity of esta- 	1
mense growth both of the wealth and power of the 	1
ment against the king seems not to have abated from 	1
mental to his honour, or inconsistent with his duty; 	1
ment, and, in any future broil with England, to turn its 	1
ment, and not to have been subject to the government of kings d : 	1
ment and preservation of the infant society. The model 	1
ment ; and upon obtaining these, they engaged to sur- 	1
mentary intermission, it soon blazed up with fresh vi- 	1
ment. At this time some severity was necessary, in 	1
ment ; but, at that time, the queen's conduct had afforded no colourable 	1
ment ; but, in order to intimidate herself, and to over- 	1
ment by which it could be rendered doubtful '. These 	1
ment carried on, in the name of James the sixth q . 	1
ment, complied at length with what Elizabeth re- 1568. 	1
ment converted them into so many acts; which, al- 	1
ment despised the groundless murmurs occasioned by 	1
mented both its power and its property during his mi- 	1
mented the hatred of the Gordons against him. 	1
ment excites among the natives, is never attended with 	1
ment f . But we may ascribe to her influence, as well as 	1
ment for some legal protection against the exorbitant 	1
ment held, towards the approaching parliament. A meeting, sum- 	1
men, the most potent, at that time, in Scotland, were 	1
men. The number of prisoners was great, and among 	1
men, this crime continued in some degree. It was to- 	1
men thus prepared, by their various interests and pas- 	1
ment in 	1
menting the spirit of dissatisfaction among the people. 	1
ment in her favourite passion, and beheld now, with se- 	1
ment in that age. Murray, who was naturally rough 	1
mention and to aggravate Mary's faults, and who does not once insinuate 	1
mentioned two things, as grounds of his disgust. She 	1
mention him with an admiration which nothing could 	1
mention, though it will be difficult for me to do him any 	1
mention what induced me to trouble your lordship. 	1
ment is indeed more laborious ; I apprehend a rough session, 	1
ment Mary had so much at heart, that she made it the 	1
ment of his good services to the kingdom. If any fu- ~~ 	1
ment of his guilt. Pasquinades and libels were affixed 	1
ment of Johnson was too fresh in the minds of all for 	1
ment of regents, who exercised a delegated jurisdiction, 	1
ment of suggesting such a task to you ; and I shall reflect 	1
ment, often render the tyrants of their own people, as 	1
ment of their country, render such an introduction 	1
ment of the kingdom, and to dispose of the queen's 	1
ment of this man, who, by flattery and assiduity, easily ^tlThim? 	1
ment or general council." No such speaker&gt; it would seem, was ever 	1
ment, particularly by Castelnau, the French ambassa- 	1
ments and entreaties, the same standard was carried 	1
ments, and gradually stripped the ecclesiastics of their 	1
ments concerning the causes of their discord, little to 	1
ments concerning this ungenerous behaviour of his 	1
ments of power '. 	1
ments of the church, which they had so long treated 	1
ments of the people in Scotland. My station in the 	1
ments she envied, had, perhaps, no less influence than 	1
ments, they contended, that concern for the public 	1
ments to me. I shall certainly receive such communications 	1
ment subsisted in vigour. Europe was peopled with 	1
ments, without any other merit, had raised him to an 	1
ment, that an eminent lawyer was allowed to plead in 	1
ment, that he acquired his great credit with the queen. Melv. 107. Darnly 	1
ment the circumstances which they transmit to pos- 	1
ment, the safety of the prince have been secured, and 	1
ment. They were all persons in whom the queen could 	1
ment. They were led to the place of execution, but, 	1
ment to Bothwell, the power and honours which she 	1
ment to from the Scottish deputies, the r rench ventured to 	1
ment, to have openly bestowed upon the king a negative before debate, 	1
ment, to have touched a heart not very susceptible of 	1
mentto sar y t o j a y the proceedings of parliament before the 	1
ment to the Romish faith was uniform and superstitious ; matlon - 	1
ment under so skilful a tutor, I have been unable to 	1
ment, was, in that age, a matter of some dispute ; that 	1
ment, which had been too long committed to other 	1
ment, with its various ranks and degrees of subordina- 	1
men was fierce and desperate ; but as the forces of the 	1
men, when they are so unfortunate as to have the chief 	1
men, which was the greatest number the conspirators 	1
mercenary armies, under our present forms of govern- 	1
merce of one half of Europe ; and he drew from them, 	1
mere despair, he abandoned them both to the mercy of 	1
merely by chance, over the different provinces of the 	1
mer engagements with an uncourtly, but honest bold- 	1
merical projects was spread industriously among the 	1
merit a note or a dissertation. 	1
merit, but possessed a negative before debate. That 	1
merit in Scotland, these effects were still more fatal ; the 	1
merit not so conspicuous, services of far inferior im- 	1
merit. That prudent minister imputed the insurrec- 	1
merit the esteem of a more discerning age; a wild 	1
merks Scottish was the allowance which their liberality 	1
merly considered as requiring the skill and authority 	1
merly e . 	1
merly she seemed determined never to give up. She 	1
merous vassals and friends of his family adhered to 	1
mer services had so little merited. He retired into the 	1
mer transports of affection and confidence. The queen's 	1
mer was a very uncertain and dangerous experiment. 	1
me shall be used with much care, and returned with great 	1
mesnes or hereditary countries is complete ; beyond the bounds of these it 	1
message, and ventured rather to incur the displeasure 	1
messenger was detained a prisoner, and the queen, ad- 	1
mestic happiness are healed, this sudden transition will 	1
mestic quarrels began to be observed. The extrava- 	1
me, that your lordship happened to be so much preoccupied 	1
me the use of fourteen volumes in quarto, containing 	1
method for the relief of the church. Some symptoms 	1
methods for silencing them. Instead of reforming their 	1
met in consequence of the treaty of pacification, had ~" 	1
met on the 7th, five days before the assembling of parliament. If they 	1
me to throw new light upon any part of the history, I 	1
met this year, the parliament did nothing more for 	1
met with, and the additional injuries which she had 	1
met with equals. In Scotland, the fertile counties in 	1
met with public opposition, they knew that it had not 	1
me wherever it is the least likely I can serve you or any of 	1
m From an original letter of Hamilton, archbishop of St. Andrew's, it 	1
midable pirates, seldom turned their arms towards 	1
midable retinue, that it would have been dangerous to 	1
midable to the crown. By forming the league which 	1
midable were nobles at the head of followers, who, 	1
midated by this, might, perhaps, delay her marriage ; 	1
midst of his vassals, was a project equally absurd and hazardous. 2. The 	1
mies ; but they suffered with a spirit so nearly resem- 	1
mies, or even to secure himself from their pursuit, he 	1
mies. The more warlike any people were, the more 	1
mies. These, however carefully concealed or artfully 	1
mies to her, and to the commonweal of this realm, etc. Therefore our sove- 	1
might afford her. Nothing was now demanded of 	1
might assuredly depend on the friendship and counte- 	1
might attempt to molest them on accpunt of their reli- 	1
might carry down the two secretaries to Fotheringay, in or- 	1
might change, used all his interest to dissuade the 	1
might claim a reward p . 	1
might come before them, it seems to have been the her to assist 	1
might endeavour to purchase it, by delivering to them 	1
might fall in, to bring this opportunity nearer than was 1561. 	1
might fall in to divert Elizabeth's attention, for the fu- 	1
might flatter himself, that the violence of her affection 	1
might have been given, by this resolution, to the national 	1
might have been rescued without difficulty out of his 	1
might have merited, a sentence of this nature, passed 	1
might have proved the ruin of their cause. The pros- 	1
might look on with security, while a storm which she 	1
might not embolden them to proceed. To attempt 	1
might probably settle there for life. No one was ever en- 	1
might put a stop to their proceedings, and, by the pri- 	1
might terminate in two different ways, she had con- 	1
might with more facility accomplish his designs. In 	1
mighty rivals with a jealous attention. On the one side, 	1
milder method of terminating disputes concerning civil 	1
mild ; his language was as correct as the style of his 	1
mildness, to which Robertson contributed not a little by 	1
miles, through a country almost impassable. The season of the year was 	1
miliarity and confidence with which monarchs then 	1
military affairs, or which required rather penetration 	1
military operations at that time were concerted with 	1
military skill as Kirkaldy, brought the regent into some 	1
military than the civil transactions of the reign of Ro- se&lt; 	1
Millar was proposing to publish me about the middle of 	1
mil maturity ; and every precaution being taken which 	1
Milns 13 	1
milton is contained the clearest evidence of this, which I publish, not only 	1
milton, who, with a few attendants, waited for her. 	1
mily, and prepared for his last hour with the fortitude 	1
mily, is wherein; and I should not choose to be often 	1
minal, often required the union and effort of half a 	1
minated in a lingering and fatal illness. He had the 	1
minated upon the regent and his party, by accusing 	1
mination of the privy council as an evidence that the 	1
mind an aversion for that family. The duke, indulging 	1
mind, and greatly increased the confidence which she 	1
mind, and moved and agitated it with so much violence, 	1
mind. It was with the utmost indignation that the 	1
minds must be overawed and governed by popular er- 	1
minds of her allies, and to screen her reputation from 	1
minds were in that ferment, which the queen's perfidious- 	1
mind was fiercer and more unpolished, relates the death 	1
mined him to support the one, or to oppose the other. 	1
mined in his own mind. He acted to the last, with that 	1
mined, others he subdued by open force. His estate 	1
mined. right of succession belonged to the descendants of 	1
mined the regent to produce his accusation against the 	1
mined to hazard a battle *. 	1
minent hazard, to be avoided with less care. Even that 	1
miniature, the model of a kingdom. He possessed the 	1
mining him to alter his purpose, and to make trial of 	1
minions of its powerful ally. 	1
minions, that all his subjects derive their possessions 	1
ministers, and one hundred and sixty-two laymen; in- 	1
ministers, and possessed of all the great offices of power 	1
ministers, before the march of the English army into Scotland. Hayne&amp;'s 	1
ministers holding an office in the university; and the 	1
ministers of Edinburgh. This lady was his cousin, and 	1
ministers, rather to conceal his resentment till a proper op- 	1
ministers, the king instantly disbanded an army which 	1
ministers were chosen with judgment ; and cardinal Bea- 	1
ministers, who prevailed upon the barons in the neigh- 	1
minister. The motives which determined the queen to 	1
minister who was commanded to publish the banns, 	1
ministration of affairs as well as the custody of the 	1
ministration of affairs, had engrossed the chief direc- 	1
ministration. This popularity, however, she owed, in 	1
ministration with great prudence. But the crime of 	1
minority, and either become languid and inactive, or 	1
minority, tion will lully appear. 	1
minster, duced none of those discoveries which she had ex- 	1
minster. She deliberated with the utmost anxiety, how 	1
minute detail, this may serve to discover the foundations 	1
minuteness of detail which many regard as the most 	1
miration of her own person, to a degree which women 	1
mired it, warmly recommended it to the imitation of his 	1
misconstruction, 110. The king himself seems, both by Melvil's account, 	1
mised, as soon as they either took the field with their 	1
mised, however, when she first began to interest herself 	1
mised to meet her in person, and to" give her such a 	1
mise in her name, that she would put a stop to the in- 	1
miseries of captivity 11 . 	1
mises, and some concessions, that, by their assistance, 	1
mises, but never joined them with a single man g . The 	1
mises of her protection, to desist from any application 	1
mises of such a patron. The proposal now was ac- 	1
mise that could reconcile him to a proposal so dis- 	1
mise, that, in all times to come, Mary should abstain 	1
mise, that she should attempt nothing, in consequence 	1
mish church ; the pope's bull dispensing with their mar- 	1
misrepresentations. But as the same passions which 	1
misrepresented, and construed into injuries; and a thou- 	1
missaries were appointed to hear and determine the 	1
missed, Mary was obliged to meet him without the 	1
missed, than she broke every article in the treaty. She 	1
missing her French troops, they would then instantly 	1
mission of murder. 	1
mission to visit the court of Scotland, was owing, in all 	1
mistaken, or misrepresented. I shall take care, on account 	1
mistress a husband, and by time a son, that we may hope our posterity shall 	1
mistress, in a strain of dignified expostulation, which 	1
mistress, were made in the language of the warmest and 	1
misunderstanding occasioned by rivalship in power. 	1
mit any act of violence upon her brother. 	1
mit any partner to the throne ; but, delighted with the 	1
mities which embittered the remainder of her days, she 	1
mitigate evils which they could not cure ; they sought 	1
mit, so just a defence ; and often renewed and urged 	1
mittance 	1
mitted. But the Scots of that age, influenced by na- 	1
mitted, for several years, to keep possession of them b . 	1
mitted him to a share in her confidence, to which nei- 	1
mitted. Morton replied with warmth, that they had 	1
mitted them the exercise of their religion with more 	1
mit, to flatter him. 	1
MJ law, the other accommodated to the tenets of the 	1
m Keith, Append. 13. 	1
MK. HUME TO DR. ROBERTSON. 	1
mob, uttering loud threats of revenge, arrived at his 	1
mode it has been communicated, I have considered it 	1
model of episcopal government was copied from that of 	1
moderation, men whose minds were possessed with that 	1
moderation of those who favoured the reformation. 	1
moderation which had induced government, some years 	1
modest and learned man, I have had the pleasure of seeing ; 	1
modish French style runs into the other extreme." . . 	1
mo i 111 &gt;ii -i pendence 	1
moir for illustrating his map of Indostan. 	1
molish a fortification which might prove of advan- 	1
mollified by the same arts, nor subdued by the same 	1
mon, and the restraints of law and decency were little 	1
mon appellation, either patronymical or local, long be- 	1
monarch caHed in question the independence of Scot- 	1
monarchs, was a prisoner in her hands, and appeared, 	1
monarchs were at the utmost pains to circumscribe the courts. 	1
monarchs were very different. The blow which Lewis 	1
monarchy, it was continued, with a few limitations, in 	1
Monasteries and friar houses 7 	1
monasteries. The former were spoiled of every decora- 	1
Mondovi, was the person on whom Pius the fifth con- 	1
moned in a manner so extraordinary, at such a critical 	1
moned them to appear, and to shew by what rights they 	1
money is so little requisite to a man who is distinguished 	1
money purchases^ or authority extorts, was not an equal 	1
mon histories of that time, such as Buchanan, Spottiswood, 	1
monks ventured to preach publicly to the people k . 	1
monly far distant from the heart. In sailing from 	1
monly found the lords of articles no less obsequious to 	1
monly imputed to the effects of poison 1 . It is impos- 	1
mons, by the name of the GOOD REGENT. 	1
mons her was obeyed with all the promptness and alacrity with 	1
monsieur d'Oysel to demand of Elizabeth a safe-con- 	1
monsieur Helvetius, I warn you, that this is the last time 	1
monsieur Helvetius with regard to the translating his work. 	1
monsieur Matigny, a counsellor of state. He added, that 	1
mons, laid or strengthened the foundations of the Eng- 	1
monstrances, convinced the lords of the congregation, 	1
monstrances of the assembly, by falling on some new 	1
monstrances of their rival. 	1
monstrates so fully the extent of their power, as the 	1
monstrating; and the leaders of the opposite faction 	1
months, who will be in the situation of doing you jus- 	1
Montmorency, by the assistance of the dutchess of Va- 	1
monuments of ecclesiastic pride and luxury, were sacri- 	1
mon, was preparing to celebrate mass, and began to 	1
mony, no eloquence, no ornament ; and not much cor- 	1
mony was performed in public, according to the rites 	1
moralist in favour of the patron's right, which he who 	1
Morav. apud Innes, Essay, vol. i. p. 272. 	1
more closely, by entering into a stricter bond of confe- 	1
more closely than ever by his creatures ; none of her 	1
more common, and the spirit of innovation, peculiar to 	1
more compliant with respect to other articles, particu- 	1
more contradictory intrigues, than the marriage of the 	1
more dexterity and success, than Cecil. In the conduct 	1
more ease. Confederacies were formed to humble any 	1
more eminent for zeal and piety, than for learning. 	1
more fatal to the grandeur of the established church. 	1
more favourable to Elizabeth's future schemes. Not- 1569. 	1
more firmly in her affections' 1 . But whatever benefit 	1
more formidable rival than ever to Elizabeth. 	1
more gallantry than good conduct, were almost sur- 	1
more good-will than she did to the queen of England : that 	1
more intricate. She seemed to be full of concern for 	1
more narrowly the dangerous tendency of her councils, 	1
more necessary towards facilitating his schemes in the 	1
more perfectly. By publicly ratifying the treaty con- 	1
more powerful than ever. The nobles who were most 	1
more precise ; and Mary, instead of promising to abstain 	1
more proper to allure and interest the multitude, or 	1
more rapid and impetuous, than they were slow and di- 	1
more ready to flatter, than to instruct him. It was the 	1
more remarkably displayed. Love sharpened her in- gafnTng h 	1
more, see a foreign army in the island, overawing the 	1
more singular expedients for obtaining power 1 '. When 	1
more suitable to feudal ideas, than that the same per- 	1
more suitable to the spirit of republican policy. As the 	1
more than royal. 	1
more than to keep the question concerning the succes- 	1
more to be dreaded. Instigated by them, Henry, soon They per- 	1
more unfortunate enterprise. Deserted basely by the 	1
more universal than ever had been yielded to the sta- 	1
more violent, added to the rage of those factions, which 	1
more zealous reformers, as altogether imaginary, and 	1
morials addressed by each party to the pope, who was 	1
morland, though little distinguished by their personal 	1
morning, who, as I fancy, gave me the key of the difficulty, 	1
mortified, no doubt, the pride of the Scottish queen. 	1
Morton and his associates, or who adhered to the house 	1
morton, out of enmity to Cecil, had embarked deeply 	1
morton, who had lately been Elizabeth's ambassador in 	1
mory I shall mention. Maltreat is a Scotticism which 	1
most accurate collation, the members of the privy coun- ~ 	1
Most affectionately yours, 	1
most agreeable to the conscience of each individual ; 	1
most amiable woman of the age ; and the fame of her 	1
most ample justification of their own conduct; and to 	1
most an express prohibition. Those nobles who already 	1
most bitter complaints, she melted into tears, and 	1
most cordial friendship. But what Melvil truly ob- 	1
most danger of her life, and to lurk, with a few attend- 	1
most dangerous extremes, concurred in raising and 	1
most dangerous rival in her claim upon the English 	1
Most faithfully yours, 	2
most favourable light, yet her obstinate adherence to 	1
most implicitly, and have repeated their errours and 	1
most influence. The popish ecclesiastics, though the 	1
most insolence and indignity. As she marched along, 	1
most joy by Douglas, lord Seaton, and sir James Ha- 	1
most loyal and attached subjects in this country : that 	1
Most of the acts passed in this assembly were calcu- 	1
most open in Scotland, he set on fire both these towns, 	1
most outrageous measures. 	1
most perfect model of this government; and Knox, who, 	1
most popular leader of the protestants, were appointed 	1
most profound and the most adventurous genius of that 	1
most rigour. Six persons of some distinction, who had 	1
most trusty accomplices followed him. Such an un- 	1
most unjustifiable action, from an ambitious man, whose 	1
most warmth. She not only disregarded these remon- 	1
mote his designs. He obtained the ratification of all 	1
mother. In this place, under strict custody, with a few 	1
mother of France. It was drawn with great art, and 	1
mother, who was a woman of rank. The other prelates 	1
moting his designs. Happily for him, the nobles had 	1
moting the honour of God, and restoring peace to the 	1
motion for a new law was first made there, and approved 	1
motions, and observed every step he took. But the 	1
motions, had openly resisted and set at defiance the 	1
motions they had been strictly united with Murray, 	1
motives, afforded them, the moderation of the arch- 	1
motives alone which influenced them, and by showing 	1
motives of fear and of hope, of terrour and of consolation, 	1
motives of interest, determined speedily to marry, Eli- 	1
motives of policy, and instigated by prospects of private 	1
motives prompted her to set no bounds to the rigour of nobles - 	1
Motives, which are well known, had prompted Henry 	1
mountains and marshes which saved their country from 	1
mounted every other motive ; and, reckoning themselves 	1
mounting the throne of Scotland, by a marriage with 	1
mours of the protestant clergy, and to be some equiva- 	1
mously acquitted. Sinclair, bishop of Ross, and presi- 	1
mous to submit to an enemy, and cowardly to forgive 	1
moved without the walls of cities. 	1
move him to the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, under burgh, 	1
move in a larger sphere, pushed its inquiries into every 	1
move it in parliament. The partisans of the house of 	1
moving both armies out of Scotland, contained an ar- 	1
Mqlvil's embassy, the countess of Lennox had warmly 	1
Mr. Calderwood, an eminent presbyterian clergyman 	1
Mr. Campbell's word : for the letters are in English, trans- 	1
Mr. Davenport had carried to Mr. Conway a letter of Rous- 	1
Mr DEAR SIR, I had a letter from Helvetius lately, wrote 	1
MR. GIBBON TO DR. ROBERTSON. 	1
Mr. Goodall, though he knew my sentiments with 	1
M r ho was now entering the twelfth year of her age, and 	1
Mr. Hume, and Dr. John Blair. What answer he re- 	1
MR. HUME TO DR. ROBERTSON. 	4
Mr. John Davidson, one of the clerks to the signet, 	1
Mr. Johnson calls it. 	1
M. Suard, directeur de la Gazette de France, rue St. Roch a 	1
m The distance between Jedburgh and Hermitage is eighteen Scottish 	1
m The intention of putting the queen to death seems to have been carried 	1
m The spirit of revenge was encouraged, not only by the manners, but, 	1
m Though this war was distinguished by no important or decisive action, 	1
much accuracy you are accustomed to examine historical facts, 	1
much as imagine a colour upon which their accusations could 	1
much better had we communicated before printing, which 	1
much boldness, the queen replied in terms no less vi- 	1
much by wise and fortunate marriages. By acquisitions 	1
much consequence, that he wished earnestly to have it 	1
much consequence was hastily decided in a parliament June 5, 	1
much contention, the following plan was approved by 	1
much, he finds more. He remarked, however, (which is also 	1
much importance, the utmost degree of caution is not 	1
much indebted, was unbrotherly and ungrateful. The 	1
much industry. All who wished for a change met with 	1
much inferior to the sentiments I feel : they are com- 	1
much more to be dreaded; her beauty, her address, 	1
much of his life seems to have passed in the bosom of 	1
much of the public notice, that in the second year of 	1
much precipitancy, or to have been carried on with too 	1
much pride to employ. The situation of the country, 	1
much regard, she mentioned it to her only in the softest 1566. 	1
much reputation for wisdom, concurring with the re- 	1
much respect, that the regent became jealous of him, 	1
much to political motives, and too little to the passions 	1
much violence. The father of George Dunbar, earl of 	1
much zeal. No task could be more acceptable to the 	1
mult among * 	1
multitude of the earl's followers f . The utmost conster- 	1
multitude, than to overturn those seats of superstition ; 	1
municated to Mary ; and Melvil, who, at that time, at- 	1
municate to you, although I mean never to be an author thereof; and that 	1
munions of the Christian church, in which custom for- 	1
murder, and disorder of all kinds, prevailed in every 	1
murder of king Henry, and the genuineness of the 	1
murder of the regent prevented the revival of that 	1
murder was the circumstance upon which her subjects 	1
mured, because he proceeded no farther. By his im- 	1
murings of all ranks of men. They foresaw the vio- 	1
murmurs, of the people. Every circumstance in the 	1
Murray. 	1
Murray, and Hamilton, abbot of Kilwinning, being ap- 	1
Murray and his party, that Lennox had been invited ray&lt; 	1
Murray could supply, was wanting to render their re- ^ted^u" 	1
Murray. movable on a rising ground, with the small but trusty 	1
Murray's opposition to the match would prove danger- 	1
Murray's proceedings with regard to her marriage gave 	1
Murray's This consent Mary laboured with the utmost industry 	1
Murray, that, in hopes of wreaking her vengeance on 1566. 	1
Murray, whose behaviour she represented to be not 	1
Musselburgh, and had drawn near the shore. The 	1
must consider that the law did not then* require this confron- 	1
must have had some pretences, and plausible ones too, before they could 	1
must have rested, as a justification of their violent pro- 	1
must impute the fierce and implacable hatred to each 	1
must make no excursions ; to relate real occurrences, 	1
mutinous provinces u . 	1
mutiny in the army. Five hundred English, who hap- 	1
mutual consent to the marriage, and a contract to this 	1
MY DEAR SIR, According to your permission I have al- 	1
MY DEAR SIR, I believe I mentioned to you, a French 	1
MY DEAR SIR, What I wrote you with regard to Mary's 	1
MY DEAR SIR, You do extremely right in applying to 	1
my fancy, must now be resigned, or must be postponed, at 	1
my future schemes, I am not impatient to enter into 	1
my history ; but although my diligence will be quickened 	1
MY LORD, I consider it as an unfortunate accident for 	1
MY LORD, I hope your lordship will forgive me for hav- 	1
MY LORD, When I took the liberty of applying to your 	1
my nearest relation and most perfect friend. I did 	1
my opinion,) that in the beginning, before your pen was suf- 	1
my own case, which I have corrected in my new edition. 	1
my own private sentiments; I honestly remonstrated 	1
my part," says the author from whom I have borrowed many of these par- 	1
my profession, nor wish ever to throw off my eccle- 	1
my's army, to gain time for collecting their own asso- 	1
myself, will be found to be of some importance. 	1
My servant will take great care of whatever books or papers 	1
my sincerest acknowledgments. My lord Royston likewise, 	1
mysterious passages in the Scottish history. As it was a transaction purely 	1
mystery, which, during her whole reign, her jealousy 	1
my surprise, when I found the contrary in every page, many 	1
my Swiss residence, which" unites almost every advantage that 	1
my warehouse full of goods at another's expense. 	1
N 2 	1
naces was soon conveyed to Perth. The protestants 	1
nacy and disdain which greatly aggravated their dis- 	1
nacy; and neither deigned to explain the motives of 	1
nacy, filled her with shame and with despair. A variety 	1
nad set themselves in opposition to all her measures, testants. 	1
Nags and geldings 1,296 	1
nalties, and, upon his non-appearance, the rigour of 	1
named and others will capitulate with your majesty in writing under their 	1
name, decided matters that belonged to the royal juris- 	1
name is mentioned several times in his work with marks of 	1
naments and decorations of their temples. To the pure 	1
name of Alexander, king of Scots ; and, in return for 	1
name of his mistress, and the duke, in person, de- 	1
name stamped upon the current coin, and to sign all public instruments to- 	1
name. Though he saw the clouds gathering, and fore- 	1
name. Thus a parliament became complete in all its 	1
nance of France ; she had reason to expect the protec- 	1
nance to the amusements of the playhouse, that the 	1
narch; and, as some time was requisite in order to 	1
narchs for their lands in England is preposterously 	1
narchs, if we rest satisfied with the accounts of their 	1
narchs laboured in vain to raise it. 	1
narchs ; who had been guilty of no action by which she 	1
narchy. Kings became conscious of their own power 	1
narrative will allow me only to give a short extract; 	1
narrowly escaped, when his companions were put to 	1
nary power of argument, will do well to consult. Ro- 	1
nary success entirely to his distinguished merit; all the 	1
nated jurisdictions to the crown, repeated in every reign, 	1
nated with the king, he could not immediately reject ; at 	1
nation, against the rash designs of that weak and ill- 	1
national story. As I have no doubt with respect to the re- 	1
nation and displeasure at the regent's presumption, in 	1
nation; and they who had leisure to reflect and to 	1
nation being quickly turned towards events of another 	1
nation. But though the manner in which the regent 	1
nation. Every instance of condescension to the papists 	1
nation. Hence, and not from disloyalty to the king, 	1
nation retired behind the queen, of whom he laid hold, 	1
nations ; but in reality that the rebels might be sure 	1
nation seized the queen, who was attended by a very 	1
nations, than either fabulous traditions, or the tales of 	1
nations, the habit of being subjected to the same king, 	1
nations which overran Europe were originally divided 	1
nation than the invasion of ten thousand armed men b . 	1
nation, the preserving of the reformed church is, never- 	1
nation. The protestants, weakened by the imprudent 	1
nation, when obliged to employ such extraordinary ef- 	1
nation which has occurred, and as we shall hereafter meet quenc/of 	1
native of Britain, or one not of princely rank, would be 	1
naturally affable and insinuating, she treated him with 	1
naturally feels ; or with that eagerness to vindicate it- 	1
naturally is attracted rather by the glare of political 	1
naturally prone to humanity and capable of forgiving, j^Jj!" 	1
naturally to have retired, and there her person might 	1
natural on that unhappy field. Her troops were 1367. 	1
natural to conclude that the prince alone possessed the right of electing 	1
nature of the action will admit. The queen's known 	1
nature, the right of judging, and redressing their own~ 	1
N. B. This is the letter of which Dr. Mackenzie, vol. iii. p. 18, and bi- 	1
n Corps Diplomat, torn. v. 21. Keith, 73. 	1
nearer union to the crown, would become a mutinous 	1
near her such persons as betrayed her, by their insi- 	1
nearly resembled that to which they had been accus- 	1
near the borders, considered themselves as bound, both 	1
near to prevent the Scots from consenting to an union 	1
necessarily follow, removes the chief point in which, I appre- 	1
necessary and of importance. They were all equally 	1
necessary ; but disgrace, and, perhaps, ruin, were the 	1
necessary delay affords some cause for suspicion. It is true, Mary, in her 	1
necessary for rendering it effectual. He executed his 	1
necessary to withdraw the veteran troops already em- 	1
necessity of conforming to the practice of preaching 	1
necessity of observing any thing which might appear a mis- 	1
necessity of that course which the confederates held, it 	1
necks. Martial as the genius of the Scots then was, 	1
nected with the discovery of the new world, and in- 	1
needed the aid of such artifices, to ridicule. 	1
need no longer go to history to trace it in all its stages 	1
nefices. Some laymen, especially those who had been 	1
Neglected Mary's neglect of the king on this occasion was equal 	1
neglected to support them with proper vigour. The 	1
neglecting to avenge it, have made his name to be re- 	1
negotiation for this purpose was carried some length, 	1
negotiations, by entering into a closer union with his 	1
negotiation with the cardinal of Lorrain, who had pro- 	1
neighbourhood of Dunbar. But finding it impossible 	1
neighbouring clans, who took arms in her defence, 	1
neighbouring kingdoms was so visible, that its history 	1
neighbour into the heart of his territories, who might 	1
neighbours found it necessary to unite in this manner 	1
neighbours to an easy prey. The Italians, who had 	1
neither feared the king, nor pitied the people q . 	1
Neither party, however, was impatient to engage. 	1
neither procure him liberty, nor mitigate the hardships 	1
neither the abilities nor the ambition which might in- 	1
neither to be disputed nor disobeyed h . 	1
nence was founded upon the power of the church of 	1
nent among the reformed preachers, listened to his in- 	1
nent courtiers combined against him; and the earl of 	1
nent reformers suffered for the doctrines which they 	1
nent ; such an interesting subject deserves undoubtedly the 	1
nephew. In order to accomplish this, he transmitted 	1
neral desire, and wish you health to go on with what will be 	1
neral disaffection, added to the resentment which he 	1
neral disposition to gratify the queen in a matter which 	1
neral, he marched over the Tweed with his own sol- 	1
ner, as put this valuable privilege entirely in the king's 	1
ner as to let in no light upon that scene of guilt x . 	1
nerated into cunning ; his acuteness bordered upon ex- 	1
nerations." 	1
ner, by an act in favour of the protestant religion, to able law in 	1
ner in which the parliament enforced the observation 	1
nerosity bestowed on them the lands of the vanquished. 	1
ners, he quickly crept into the queen's favour, and her 	1
ners of the kingdom, the nobles crowded to testify their 	1
ners of the kingdom very distant from each other, and 	1
ner some barbarous chieftain ruled at pleasure, and 	1
ner unbecoming his dignity, as first prince of the blood, 	1
ner with which they had ventured to take the life of a 	1
ness and reserve ; and instead of his natural manner, 	1
ness and strength, by being united into a regular mo- 	1
ness and success of his own enterprise, and uncertain |^ ns ^ 	1
ness and their own danger occasioned, he mounted the 	1
ness, but almost extinguished his power. Decency, 	1
ness, not to his own behaviour, which had so well me- 	1
ness now was to save appearances, and to justify herself 	1
ness of his understanding, and the inconstancy of his 	1
ness of manners prevailed among the Scottish clergy . 	1
ness of that age, she added the private resentment of 	1
ness, she so far forgot her usual moderation, as to utter 	1
ness, the king, who resided at Stirling, never came near 	1
ness to accept of Leicester, gave an answer in such 	1
ness was examined, nor any evidence produced against ac( l ult 	1
ness, were obliged^to overlook some irregularities, and 	1
nestness than ever, to be admitted into Elizabeth's pre- 	1
Netherlands, than the involving England in the con- 	1
neutrality, which he deemed becoming the dignity of 	1
never conceive to be practicable. The promise too, 	1
Never did any prince ascend the throne at a juncture State of the 	1
never have dreaded the destructive violence of that 	1
never have extorted. Many laws of importance were 	1
never heartily favoured their cause. He was courted 	1
never pass out of the town alive, except they have their ships restored. 	1
never received the countenance or sanction of royal 	1
new and less potent vassals of the crown. Both were 	1
new barrier against the future encroachments of regal 	1
new boldness to their enterprising spirit, and enable 	1
New breach The delay of a few weeks would have saved the con- 	1
new commissioners, in whom she could more absolutely 	1
new dignity, when a negotiation was opened with Eng- 	1
new her intrigues with all parties ; with the protestants, 	1
new offence . 	1
new property flowed successively into it. Whatever 	1
new reinforcements, she instantly ordered a strong 	1
new settlements. They did not exterminate the an- 	1
new statutes to the same purpose were enacted; and 	1
new system prevailed. Ever since Mary's arrival in 	1
next heirs to the regent r ." Succession by hereditary 	1
Next week I am published ; and then I expect a constant 	1
ney, the earls of Rothes and Cassils, lord Fleming, lord Seton, the prior of 	1
nial for Henry, to secure his right of succession, if the 	1
nicated his intentions to the prisoners taken at Solway, 	1
nication, which the pope pronounced against them, 	1
Nicholas Throkmorton her ambassador extraordinary. 	1
nicipal, adverse to the reformed religion, and exempt- 	1
niece more worthy the heir of France, they set on foot 	1
niece, the queen of Scots, with the young king, they now 	1
night. In the morning, the coast of France was still 	1
night, into the open fields, where, before next morn- 	1
niherst, and afterwards conveyed into the Netherlands. 	1
nimity and vigour of their own resolutions, they endea- 	1
nineteen years of age, unacquainted with the manners 	1
ning as to espouse them out of policy, seized the whole 	1
ninth of July, with much solemnity, in presence of all 	1
nion of foreigners, a mark of infamy on the character 	1
nions, he, in order to gratify them, entertained, in his 	1
nions spread, with astonishing rapidity, all over Europe ; 	1
nions to the inclinations of her brothers, prepared to 	1
nion which men entertained concerning it. 	1
nishment ; and various and contradictory opinions were 	1
nister of Athelstonford, published his celebrated tra- 	1
nisters employed in all their consultations upon affairs 	1
nisters multiplied the insults which they offered to the 	1
nisters possessed the confidence of the nation ; and, by 	1
nist. For this reason, he desired the court to stop pro- 	1
nistration of her rival. 	1
nistry of Old Gray Friars in Edinburgh, young Robert^ 	1
nitaries were still firmly attached to the popish religion, 	1
nities and riches of the clergy. The profuse piety of 	1
nity and reputation ; and if the means of patronage had not 	1
nity, was demolished, in obedience to the canon law, 	1
nius nor courage to perfect it : and Scotland might, in 	1
nius of the feudal government. Besides these, they pos- 	1
n Keith, 242. 245. 	1
n Knox, 237. 	1
no barrier, and affords no retreat, the guilty or ob- 	1
nobility. A standing guard, a thing unknown under 	1
nobility, his insolence towards the rest, his severity to 	1
nobility on the prerogative of the prince. But, though 	1
nobility, or diminish his jealousy of their power. He 	1
noble birth ; and, as they no longer entertained hopes 	1
nobleman flattered himself. She had received repeat- 	1
nobleman had retired into France, upon what pretence 	1
noblemen *. 	1
nobles. 	1
nobles, accompanied by such numbers of followers, as 	1
nobles, after her example, treated him with open neg- 	1
nobles, and so successful even in their wildest attempts 	1
nobles, and the heads of the more illustrious families, 	1
nobles ap- tify the queen. Many of them, without hesitation, ex- 	1
nobles, as counsellors by birthright to their monarchs, 	1
nobles, at once, of privileges which they had held so 	1
nobles beheld the power, it was with the utmost diffi- 	1
nobles. Bothwell's estate lay in that corner of the 	1
nobles con- . 	1
nobles, especially by such as had embraced the refor- 	1
nobles gradually converted into a right, and rendered 	1
nobles. his design. The nation began to despair of Elizabeth's 	1
nobles not only claimed, but exercised, the right of con- 	1
nobles, of whom some were influenced by their hatred 	1
nobles. Our annals reach not back to the first division 	1
nobles remained in great vigour; and their final abo- 	1
noblesse- t ^ ie n bl es &gt; soon became intolerable to all the princes 	1
nobles sue- the princes of Europe attacked, as if by concert, the 	1
noblest blood in the kingdom in the same illegal man- 	1
nobles, then by the rebellion of others ; and she often 	1
nobles there was little union either in their views or in 	1
nobles ventured to face the enemy, who, after plunder- 	1
nobles were magnificent and formidable in proportion. 	1
nobles were present, and seem to have had great influ- 	1
nobles, while Mary treated him with the greatest re- 	1
nobles, who neither possessed the chief power, nor the 	1
Nobles, whose property was so extensive, and whose 	1
nobles who were present at the marriage; and the 	1
No common interest can be supposed to have united 	1
No conclusion, however, would be more rash, or worse 	1
no creature alive within the same, specially such as either in friendship or 	1
no difference between these could be disco vered q . Eli- 	1
No direct evidence had yet appeared against Both- Hastens on 	1
no doubt of it ; notwithstanding that the witnesses were not 	1
no doubt was entertained, should be kept in perpetual 	1
no encouragement to baseness or vice, and that I can- 	1
No endeavours were used to reconcile the contending 	1
no English monarch before him ever possessed, and, 	1
no further, without taking every possible precaution for 	1
No good effect was, therefore, to be expected from the 	1
no higher than this treaty, an inconsiderable alteration 	1
no interruption to the established clergy, either in the 	1
no less curious, which have been preserved by sir Ro- 	1
no less dishonourable to princes than grievous to their 	1
no less for its vigour, than for its wisdom. No sooner 	1
no less illustrious than it was singular. The situation 	1
no less than its own natural strength, to preserve the 	1
no longer prevented from protecting her friends in 	1
no longer stood in need of such an instrument, he was 	1
Nolt, i. e. horned cattle, taken 10,386 	1
No man could be less in a condition to contend with an 	1
No man so remarkable for wisdom, and even for 	1
no matter of reproach. 	1
nominal. James Stewart, prior of St. Andrew's, was 	1
none abiding here for me without danger." Vol. i. 451. In his letter of 	1
none of real enjoyment, covers the remainder of her 	1
None of these beneficial consequences escaped the 	1
no other advantage, secured at least domestic tran- 	1
no passion in the heart, to which it does not present 	1
No person appeared as an accuser, not a single wit- Bothwell is 	1
no proof was brought of the indictment. He took no" 	1
no prospect of liberty appeared ; none of her subjects 	1
nor Buchanan enjoyed these advantages. Their hum- 	1
nor could she view the steps taken by the confederates 	1
Nor could the king supply the defect of his revenues They had 	1
nor did an opinion, so dishonourable to her character, 	1
Nor did the queen, meanwhile, neglect to have re- 	1
Nor did they produce consequences less opposite. 	1
No revolution so great was ever effected with more 	1
Norfolk seemed to discover in these remonstrances, as 	1
Norfolk's respect to this point. Her particular motive for pro- 	1
Norfolk themselves, declared, that nothing should be 	1
nor had he, on the other hand, produced any thing 	1
nor ill-grounded. Then were produced and submitted 	1
nor indignation, at such an outrage committed on her 	1
nority. ]405 	1
North Britain was, by their retreat, left under the 	1
northern counties. With power and possessions so ex- 	1
northern kingdoms. But in Switzerland and some 	1
northern nations, we receive the earliest accounts on 	1
North of England for rescuing Mary out of the hands 	1
Northumberland was seized by the regent, who had 	1
Nor was Rizio careful to abate that envy which always 	1
Nor was this step beyond her power, unprecedented 	1
Nor were the lords of the congregation either igno- 	1
Nor were these the only circumstances which contri- 	1
no small offence to the nation by one of their actions. 	1
No sooner did mankind recover the capacity of exer- 	1
not agree among themselves what victims to sacrifice, 	1
not all of them fall more fully on you. However you must 	1
not any danger which she ought not to have run, rather 	1
not ascertained with the same precision. The question 	1
not a standing army ; and the jurisdiction he possessed 	1
not be done without my consent. 	1
not been published ; but a copy of it, which still re- 	1
not be idle. May I venture to suggest to you the ancient 	1
not be satisfied ; and begs me to keep my jokes for another 	1
not brook this diminution of his power, which his for- 	1
not choose to lose what I have done. It will take at 	1
not composed of members of parliament, the same 	1
not concur in censuring my brethren for being present 	1
not disposed to listen to this extravagant and dangerous 	1
not dread the efforts of an army provided neither with 	1
not escape alive ; and also it hath much incensed and provoked the people 	1
not escape into her own kingdom p . On their arrival, 	1
not escape the notice of that discerning princess. She 	1
not even answer the complaints brought against him- 	1
note which he found means of conveying to her, sug- 	1
not expect him to take part in their quarrel, hut upon 	1
note you seemed to intend with regard to the breach of the 	1
not fail of inspiring him with more elevated hopes. 	1
not fail to fulfil these engagements'. 	1
not fix him for a separate answer. My direction is, A mon- 	1
not from inclination, but extorted by the necessity of 	1
not gain the king's heart, he resolved to make sure of 	1
nothing by delay, marched briskly towards the enemy. 	1
Nothing can be more surprising to men accustomed 	1
Nothing could be a more cmel disappointment to Lennox 	1
Nothing could be farther than this from the mind and 	1
Nothing could be more artful than this pretence; 	1
nothing could be so dishonourable to their mistress as 	1
Nothing could equal the horrour of the protestants, 	1
Nothing could now save the French troops shut up Motives of 	1
nothing else but acquit him. Their verdict, however, 	1
Nothing, however, could be a more cruel mortifica- Elizabeth 	1
nothing more than general suspicions, and uncertain 	1
nothing more was intended by this promise than to 	1
nothing more was said on these subjects than was 	1
Nothing No attempt was made, in this parliament, to procure 	1
Nothing now remained but to concert the plan of 1566. 	1
nothing of their real design, she concluded that they 	1
nothing on this occasion but desire Strahan to stop the press 	1
Nothing remained in the hands of the crown ; all was seized by them. 	1
nothing that could contribute to root out the remains 	1
nothing that could either sooth or bribe the nobles to 	1
Nothing, therefore, remained but to detain her in Resolves to 	1
Nothing which Bedford's personal friendship for They meet 	1
nothing would calm and appease them, but the relin- 	1
not, however, possess means sufficient for accomplish- 	1
not, in any degree, mitigate their resentment, or pro- 	1
not inconsistent with that which the king possessed; 	1
not independent ; a king powerful, though far from ab- 	1
not in the queen's power to make so important a cog- 	1
notions of royal prerogative were very exalted. The 	1
notions, on their first appearance, in tlje southern king- 	1
not less praise than he deserved*. 	1
not mentioned by any Roman author, before the end 	1
not neglect the usual, though barbarous, precaution for 	1
not numerous ; the suddenness and secrecy of their 	1
not of a temper to admit all the pretensions of such as- 	1
not of my acquaintance, and shall inquire of him the canals 	1
not only allowed, but encouraged, Morton and his asso- 	1
not only for the honour you have done me, but for the 	1
not only from succeeding to the crown, but to deprive 	1
not only of subverting the established religion, but of 	1
not only prepared for their own defence, but resolved, 	1
not only the confederate nobles, but the nation in 	1
not only the total suppression of the popish worship 	1
not only with impunity, but even with honour. During 	1
not possess extensive authority ; and, conscious of their 	1
not possibly see the grounds of Mary's guilt, and every equi- 	1
not presume to decide, but permitted the parliament, 	1
not reckon his own power secure. For this reason, 	1
not resist the torrent, they suffered it to take its course, 	1
not restored, that they would have their amends of me and mine, and that 	1
not risk a delay s . His army followed him with reluct- 	1
not seen, but have been informed, that it is written in 	1
not so effectual a scourer of reputations in the world. I wish 	1
not squandered what he acquired, with a profusion 	1
not their literature still in a somewhat barbarous state, 	1
not the least considerable circumstance, which called 	1
not the power to perform, by giving him in marriage 	1
not the sole business of Bedford's embassy. His in- 	1
not to be able to comply with your desire, when you expressed 	1
not to be accomplished by ordinary readers. 	1
not to have been admitted into the secrets of the con- 	1
not to have been sincere : we know with certainty that 	1
not to have been unacquainted with the intention of the 	1
not to take part with the murderers of Rizio. Their 	1
not view in a very gloomy light, will be terminated in due 	1
not well grant it in one case without granting it in all, be- 	1
not, with any colour of justice, have been retained by 	1
not without reason, as a dangerous enemy to the 	1
not without signs of resentment at Elizabeth's pretend- 	1
not without success. We find Knox, about this period, 	1
notwithstanding Bruce's plea of being nearer in blopd 	1
notwithstanding her fears of losing Leicester, solicited 	1
notwithstanding my deference to your authority, I cannot 	1
notwithstanding the clouds which gathered on every 	1
notwithstanding their attention to extend their usurpa- 	1
notwithstanding their known indigence, and the warm 	1
notwithstanding the repeated solicitations of the king of 	1
notwithstanding the zeal for religion and liberty which 	1
Notwithstanding this scene of farce and of falsehood, 	1
not yet recovered the blow which fell on their order at 	1
not yield upon any consideration of their own safety. 	1
nounced, without hesitation, both from the precepts 	1
nourable birth and of primitive sanctity, wore out the 	1
nourished by all these means, and grew, by daily in- 	1
nours of their ancestors. Several of those who had 	1
Nov. 25. To the commissioners who had appeared in her name 	1
Nov. 29. 	1
Nov. 9. layed giving obedience. A second and more peremp- 	1
Novemb. 6. zeal for the cause. At midnight they set out from 	1
now an inconsiderable party in the kingdom, and dispi- 	1
now assault and subvert the Roman empire, enjoy the advan- 	1
now at mercy, the objects of compassion, and suing for 	1
no way dishonourable. 	1
now correct her manuscript ; and should be happy to render 	1
now discovered to be unchristian. They expected to 	1
now drained of men and money by a tedious and unsuc- 	1
now in their own power to be reconciled to their queen, 	1
now possess as judges, as legislators, and as dispensers 	1
now recovered liberty, watched for such an opportunity 	1
now to unfold their intentions without any disguise. In 	1
now unknown. Their execution struck the whole order 	1
now visible, that she wantonly sacrificed the peace and ~ 	1
nox, convinced that Mary was accessory to the murder 	1
nox, could prevail to have the trial put off. On the 	1
noxious are soon detected and punished. Mountains, 	1
nox's own letters, in which he craved of the queen to ~~ 	1
nual inroads and alarms ; the residence of our monarchs 	1
nuations, into many actions, which her own unbiassed 	1
nuine and violent love. Rizio aided this passion, and promoted the mar- 	1
null and invalid f . 	1
number, and, being devoted implicitly to the crown, for 	1
number and wealth of his subjects. Though the war 	1
number, did not long remain satisfied with such divided 	1
number of barons than attended on the king himself. 	1
number of each house. She soothed and caressed 	1
number of their countrymen expelled their habitations 	1
number of the protestants to be irresistible, determined 	1
number of the temporal peers was extremely small, and 	1
numbers ; feeble if divided among a multitude, irre- 	1
numbers, to attend their pastors to Stirling. The 	1
numbers to Perth, that they not only secured the town 	1
number than was usual in times of peace ; all these 	1
numerous adherents of the reformation. Besides, that 	1
numerous and more popular. They formed a separate 	1
numerous body of his friends and vassals, assembled, 	1
numerous vassals, one of the most powerful noblemen in 	1
nuncio was already arrived at Paris, and had sent over 	1
nuscripts. He brought me a letter of yours to Strahan, where 	1
nute detail of his actions. He had penetration enough 	1
oaths, and confirmed them by deeds in form, under 	1
obedience, refused to advance a step beyond the limits 	1
obey g ; that all these expressions of aversion fully per- 	1
obiect of pity, to which he had otherwise no title. 	1
objected to his conduct, which she could reckon detri- 	1
object of great importance to Mary ; and though she ^elh'f fa-* 	1
object of her wishes and ambition, it became necessary 	1
object of these authors. Blinded by prejudices, and 	1
objects adapted to rouse and to interest them. Neither 	1
objects of the society were philosophical inquiry and 	1
objects which drew their attention. Long before Lu- 	1
obligations to Elizabeth, and prompt her to renew the 	1
obligation to you more complete, and my thanks, if 	1
obliged him to prefer his safety before his fame, and to 	1
obliged them to use their victory with great moderation 	1
obliged to abandon their design. The reviewers had 	1
obliged to contract their views ; to turn them from fo- ~ 	1
obliged to disperse, and the chiefs took refuge among 	1
obliged to dissemble, that she might have leisure to re- 	1
obliged to hold their religious assemblies by stealth and 	1
obliged to lodge in the town, which was open and de- 	1
obliged to retire, in order to be at liberty to indulge 1566. 	1
obliged to retire to Geneva. Thence he was called by 	1
Obliges the it, an enemy to his country. On the third of Septem- 	1
obliging him to move very slowly, gave the assassin 	1
obsequious and the least formidable of the two compe- 	1
observance of the treaty, they bound themselves to 	1
observations of his friends, that he was remarkable ra- 	1
observed and quickened their motions. Money seemed 	1
observed, but did not interrupt it. Nothing could fall 	1
observed by us, did the Scottish nobility owe that ex- 	1
observed her first motions, with the utmost solicitude, 	1
observed in electing them. From a great part of the 	1
observed, seem to have been among the first things that 	1
observed, that, as we can discover no motive which 	1
observed their monarchs, and the fierceness with which 	1
observed the proceedings of parliament, a step so un- 	1
observe, that she was tinctured with a jealousy of her 1661. 	1
observe that the greatest rustics are commonly most affected 	1
obstruction to their designs. To what violent extremes 	1
obstruct it r . Among the subscribers of this paper we 	1
obtained for this would extend to every thing of which 	1
obtained from her a proclamation highly favourable to 	1
obtained such advantages over the hugonots, that the 	1
obtained the sanction of public authority, and some "an church 	1
obtaining the victory, vindicated his own honour. In 	1
obtain such a delay as he demanded g . Nothing can be 	1
obtains your approbation. The praise which has ever been 	1
obtain that, she hoped, during this interval, to receive 	1
obviate this, Mary appeared in the court of session, 	1
obvious and wise reasons, one of the strongest passions 	1
occasion. But that I am resolved not to do; and, therefore, 	1
occasioned. All the violent passions, which are the 	1
occasioned by her marriage, exhausted a treasury which 	1
occasioned by his natural constitution, and the other 	1
occasioned rather by their being weary of war than de- 	1
occasion of all Mary's subsequent misfortunes. This 	1
occasions, his subjects granted him an aid, which they 	1
occasion. The inhabitants fled from the enemy by the 	1
occupation for the turbulent spirit of their nobles, in 	1
occupation of both courts, a scheme was formed, and 	1
occupied a distinct portion of the kingdom, and formed 	1
occupied her attention. On the twenty-ninth of July, Celebrates 	1
occupied the court of Spain, had secured them from 	1
occurrences in the period now under our review. 	1
occurs once. What the devil have you to do with that 	1
Oct. 1550. ling to fall in with her measures, the queen set out for 	1
Oct. 28. With these troops, however, Murray, who could gain 	1
Oct. 3. to Windsor. He was first kept as a prisoner in a 	1
Oct 8 were permitted to prefer a complaint against the regent 	1
Oct. 9. He demanded, therefore, to be informed, before he 	1
October, 1566, when Bothwell's credit was very considerable, the queen, 	1
Odious to 	1
o eatoun. conc i us j on o f fa[ s peace, rendered it more acceptable 	1
OF 	2
of abilities or political wisdom ; and appears to have 	1
of a cannon which burst near him at the siege of Rox- 	1
of a chieftain, or even of his vassals, often excited re- 	1
of a chronological research ; and if you discover either omis- 	1
of a civil war, Edward was chosen umpire, and both 	1
of a conspiracy. All the persons accused, denied their 	1
of a crime in which so many accomplices were concerned, 	1
of a few weeks, changed their leaders. The regent was 	1
of a kingdom much more powerful than her own ; and 	1
of Albany to Edinburgh castle. The earl of Mar, 	1
of a leader of experience, as soon as they ventured 	1
of a letter from that gentleman to Dr. Robertson, 	1
of Alexander the third, near a century after, Edward 	1
of all her arguments and entreaties, he remained silent 	1
of all her private amusements. The haughty spirit of 	1
of all orders of men to the parliament, which met on 	1
Of all our historians, Buchanan alone avowedly accuses Mary of a 	1
of all power. He could not, on some occasions, conceal 	1
of all succeeding ages. 	1
of all the amusements, and even prone to all the vices 	1
of a London life has not allowed me to obtain so much as I 	1
of Alva attended his mistress. Amidst the scenes of 	1
of a martial people. The government of an infant queen 	1
of America, in two volumes quarto. His biographer 	1
of an action so detestable as the restoring her to her 	1
of an affront, which, in no former age, would have been 	1
of ancient republican government. 	1
of ancient Scottish poems, p. 308. 3. Bishop Lesley affirms that the king's 	1
of a new negotiation through a different channel. 	1
of an inclination to disturb the tranquillity of England, 	1
of Anjou. 	1
of Anjou, the brother of her former husband, who soon 	1
of another, and the fatal despair of a third, contributed, 	1
of antiquity declared, that he had framed for his fellow- 	1
of any interruption from Scotland to his designs against 	1
of any new undertakings. I am, with great regard, 	1
of any of those factions into which the nobles were 	1
of a party, and the lie of the day. The declaration of the nobles referred 	1
of appearing as an exile and a fugitive in that kingdom 1568. 	1
of a public professor to develop and enforce, are now 	1
of a society, which is always acquiring, and can never 	1
of a sovereign ; and their scruples on this head might 	1
of a thick fog, Mary escaped the English fleet, which, 	1
of barbarism, and no mode of refinement, which we 	1
of Beatoun and of the duke of Guise, not only without 	1
of behaviour, and loaded each other with professions of 	1
of being instrumental in contributing to the translation of the 	1
of being reduced, from an independent kingdom, to 	1
of being satisfied with a share in the administration of 	1
of books, the tools of my historical manufacture; others I 	1
of boroughs. Nor were these divided, as in England, 	1
of both par- eyes o f a ]| tne na ti on we re turned on them with asto- 	1
of both the disputants ; the acuteness of the former, 	1
of Bothwell, for reasons extremely frivolous, beheading 	1
of Bothwell's dependents were convicted of being guilty Jan - 3 - 	1
of business during the last week of the session. In compli- 	1
of cardinal Beatoun, and were about to include a priest, who was one of 	1
of Cecil to collect whatever related to that period, in 	1
of Charlemagne encouraged the peers to usurp an independent jurisdiction. 	1
of Chatelherault and his son, the presumptive heirs to 	1
of Chatelherault, had lived in banishment for twenty 	1
of Christianity, to recall, without written assistance, the 	1
of churchmen with the utmost contempt ; while, at the 	1
of circumstance or situation will probably tempt me to desert 	1
of civil liberty beheld with pleasure the protestant clergy 	1
of coldness, but of a growing disgust and aversion. In 	1
of commerce, were, by consequence, inconsiderable; 	1
of commons, where an English gentleman came to me, and 	1
of compensation for the sums which he might have re- 	1
of compunction, for a crime no less dishonourable than 	1
of correcting a mistake of so great moment ; but he absolutely 	1
of crushing the mutinous spirit of her subjects, rejected 	1
of danger, were ready to run to them, the leaders of 	1
of ' David's slaughter' as coolly as if it had been an 	1
o^fde- eilas ever y consideration of good policy, prompted them 	1
of dignity and concern, which is purchased to history 	1
of discovery is displayed with learning and perspicuity ; 	1
of disgust, but instantly dismissed them and their vas- 	1
of duke of Orkney was conferred upon Bothwell ; and 	1
of duty and affection on theirs ; and, in his war with 	1
of ecclesiastical policy. The church of Geneva, formed 	1
of ecclesiastical policy was modelled, in some measure, 	1
of ecclesiastics. The example of that virtuous prince 	1
of Edinburgh a casket, containing several sonnets and 	1
of Edinburgh, Stirling, and other castles, and to fill his 	1
of either queen. Though Mary had been obliged to "~ 	1
of Elizabeth and Mary k . 	1
of England after another sort, without bending any more upon 	1
of England. As this proposal could not be rejected 	1
of England, did not at once venture finally to reject 	1
of England, Dr. John Blair mentioned to him, as an 	1
of England. They affected to publish this to all Eu- 	1
of England was, without doubt, imperial and independ- 	1
of England which was in sight, intended for the aid of 	1
of ever wearing the English crown". 	1
of every tax imposed on land ; and, as there is no rea- 	1
of evidence and information with regard to the affairs of this period. 	1
of exciting high and dangerous passions, prevailed on 	1
of excommunication was no less formidable than a sen- 	1
of exiles, who are obliged to depend on a foreign prince. 	1
of February, about eleven at night, the queen left the 	1
of February, was prorogued to the seventh of April d ; 	1
offended with the indecent precipitancy of her marriage 	1
offender, decoyed him by many promises to an inter- 	1
offend her. Mary felt this insult sensibly ; and, not- 	1
offensive. The danger of introducing a foreign interest 	1
offered ; and, in the end, prevailed to have this formi- 	1
offered, and to cover, if possible, the whole transaction 	1
offered in the name of the Scottish queen. It was ex- 	1
offered to him. Ibid. Though he had once consented to appear, he after- 	1
offered to show that his accusations were not malicious, 	1
offered to submit her cause to the cognizance of Eliza- 	1
offered to themselves, and alarmed with this plain de- 	1
offered to the nation, crowded to his standard. In 	1
offered with such an air of superiority and command, 	1
offer so ill-timed must be considered as a confession of 	1
office, and started many doubts and scruples, with re- 	1
office ; and Wotton, dean of Canterbury, grown old in 	1
office, by the late reverend Mr. Crawford, regius pro- 	1
office of sheriff was held in the same manner. 	1
office re- 6 much to the detriment of the kingdom . 	1
officers, that he broke off the negotiation, and deter- 	1
officers were absent; their soldiers had left their sta- 	1
offices, which they were apt, from long possession, to 	1
office was sometimes rendered inconsiderable, by being 	1
official or personal, and being annexed to a particular 	1
of fidelity to him. Keith, Append. 20. His authority became, in some 	1
of folly, or the suspicion of treachery. Some secret 	1
of fomenting the troubles in Scotland by her intrigues. 	1
of foundation. 	1
of four days, with the same indecent and suspicious 	1
of France ; and Henry, from an ally, raised to be master 	1
of France, of fortune could occasion ; slighted by the queen-mo- 	1
of France, ratified every article with the most solemn 	1
off that authority which the popish ecclesiastics regain- 	1
off the consummation of the marriage for some months*. 	1
off the field. The English infantry, however, advanced; 	1
of gaining many proselytes. 	1
of government, and the barons became accustomed, 	1
of government in the popish church ; and the same spirit 	1
of great advantage to himself. The governor of Dun- 	1
of great importance, and the steps taken towards it de- 	1
of great power and dignity; the debasing the current 	1
of grimace than of reality P. 	1
of Guise, and the cardinal of Lorrain, were the persons 	1
of Guise. The historians of all nations discover an 	1
of Hamilton and the earl of Bothwell, and was height- 	1
of Hamilton, he was left almost alone in a neglected and 	1
of Hamilton; she continued to treat them with great 	1
of having listened to them. But it will not exempt her from the charge of 	1
of her affairs to himself. His ambition proved fatal to 	1
of her conduct ; nor can any thing mark more strongly 	1
of her conduct that was liable to censure, not to ac- 	1
of her death. And I could wish you had likewise seen a 	1
of her estate during his own life, if he happened to sur- 	1
of her fate, was never allowed to indulge those tender 	1
of her irreconcilable hatred, if he acted a contrary 	1
of her keepers, Norfolk, who was afraid that if she 	1
of her kingdom upon strangers, was concealed with the 	1
of her own kingdom, and expose it to the calamities of 	1
of her own sex, she added many of the accomplishments 	1
of her parliament, she might have broken in upon the 	1
of her persecution equalled the deeds of those tyrants 	1
of her pretensions to the English crown, prejudicial 	1
of her principal secretary, William Maitiand of Lething- dowa g er - 	1
of her resolution to reestablish the catholic church". 	1
of her son, and thirsting for that vengeance which it 	1
of her vengeance against the malecontent nobles to be 	1
of his adherents were totally broken, and an accommo- 	1
of his character, she nearly resembled. Like him, she 	1
of his contemporaries, or the records left by his friends: 	1
of his country. 	1
of his country, could not atone for his ambition in usurp- 	1
of his country. During the fourth period, the affairs 	1
of his guilt, and the condemning lady Glamis, a sister 	1
of his imprisonment. He languished ten years in this 	1
of his kingdom, not as an object of terrour to himself. 	1
of his life, of flattery, and impatient of advice, his 	1
of his mistress, by disobeying her commands, than to 	1
of his promise to Norfolk ; and if he regarded either ~~ 	1
of his rival could not withstand its united strength. 	1
of his subjects, and exposed him to the scorn of his 	1
of his task I cannot think of than that made by Bryan 	1
of his vassal. At that critical period arose sir William 	1
of hj,s substance to pious uses b . As men are apt to 	1
of homage, and absolved William from the hard con- 	1
of honour ; when we behold the most potent peers, on 	1
of Huntly's sister, dissolved. In order to accomplish 	1
of Il&lt; the rise and progress of this passion, the letters them- 	1
of instruction I have received from your incomparable 	1
of intestine discord and animosity. 	1
of it, as a salutary project. The earls of Arundel, 	1
of it by an hasty march thither with part of their forces, the pro- 	1
of it, said, that you was certainly mistaken with regard to the 	1
of its course, and, as it rolled on, new honours and 	1
of it to the queen. Pembroke, Arundel, Lumley, and 	1
of it, you would be so obliging as to communicate your senti- 	1
of James the fifth. I most heartily join my voice to this ge- 	1
of July, 1 777, of which the following extract is given 	1
of justice . Meanwhile, Gordon made his escape out 	1
of 'justiciary' extended. The crown, in this particular, 	1
of kindness, as they were made with little sincerity, 	1
of king and queen ". Nothing can be a stronger proof 	1
of king and queen of England in any time to come h . 	1
of kings. He saw his son, lord Darnley, mount the 	1
of lay patrons to present ministers to parishes be well- 	1
of Leicester, her power over this creature of her own 	1
of Leicester, notwithstanding, in terms full of respect 8 . 	1
of Lennox appeared before them ; and, after bewailing 	1
of Lennox. In the year one thousand five hundred 	1
of Lennox's return into Scotland, Murray perceived that 	1
of Lethington and the other courtiers z , he was unani- 	1
of letters which Elizabeth had received at different 	1
oflh^bor- to reform the internal policy of the country, became the 	1
of liberality, some stretch towards munificence, might 	1
of little genius, of no experience in business, and in- 	1
of Lochlevin, and signed a warrant to William Douglas, They im 	1
of Lorrain discovered and disappointed that design, it 	1
of Lorrain from carrying their designs upon Scotland 	1
of Lorrain in behalf of his son don Carlos, at that time 	1
of Lorrain in their infancy, and, by such an early and 	1
of Lorrain, with regard to the affairs of Scotland, acknowledges, with his 	1
of love. Mary's known character fully vindicates her 	1
of many among the people, was attended with manifold 	1
of many difficulties, and at the expense of many crimes, 	1
of many other feudal regulations. The royal jurisdic- 	1
of March one thousand five hundred and fifty-eight, 	1
of marriages, legacies, and other accidents, brought 	1
of marrying the queen, whose consent, he told them, 	1
of Mary's enemies what they deemed the fullest evi- 	1
of May, 1780, and the last except one in which Dr. 	1
of May, while his brother sat at supper, and the rest 	1
of meeting with the ignominy due to his actions, or the 	1
of molestation which they might entertain, Mary de- 	1
of moment. 	1
of more advantage to her than Darnly 's journey into 	1
of Morton, and Maitland, all the most zealous leaders 	1
Of most men the occupations above mentioned would 	1
of Mr. Davenport. Mr. Davenport then addressed himself 	1
of much weight, to induce that artful princess to put 	1
of Murray and his party seemed now inevitable, and 	1
of Murray was to be appointed to govern the kingdom, 	1
of my friends. If you have a copy, and will be so good as 	1
of national spirit, the whole kingdom must of necessity 	1
of new and burthensome taxes ; and the attempting to 	1
of noblemen, and an incredible number of barons, fell 	1
of no long continuance, and the fall of his family, ac- 	1
of no superiority of one minister above another, it re- 	1
of obtaining it. The numbers that resorted to an as- 	1
of one great family is apt either to excite the suspicion 	1
of one kingdom could pass into the other without the 	1
of ordinary understandings either do not entertain, or 	1
of Orkney, one of the few prelates who had embraced 	1
of, or rejected by the members of it; what they approved 	1
of our kings, from Robert Bruce to James the fifth, 	1
of Paisley, who returned into Scotland some time be- 	1
of parliament. 	1
of parliament, and rendered the observance of them 	1
of parliament, their decisions were final. James the 	1
of parliament, were extremely few ; even so late as the 	1
of parliament with the overtures which had been made 	1
of passions preyed at once on a mind, all whose sensa- 	1
of past transactions might have been the effect of this 	1
of peace, with a vast train of armed followers. The 	1
of piracy merited. His real character was soon dis- 	1
of pity; and to take advantage of her situation, would 	1
of policy, with respect to Scotland, which his prede- 	1
of political interest, was at last appointed at Bayonne. 	1
of political life, to which my nature has always been averse. 	1
of popery, and Lennox in the same station with the ad- 	1
of popery is extremely favourable to the power of 	1
of popery, or to encourage the growth of the reforma- 	1
of poverty and insignificance. The prevalence of these 	1
of power, and even wanton instances of oppression, to 	1
of power and profit bestowed by the favour of a prince, 	1
of power is founded so much upon obvious reasoning, 	1
of presenting their desires to their sovereigns, in the 	1
of princes, who often reckon falsehood and deceit 	1
of prison, and flying into Aberdeenshire, complained 	1
of private revenge was the object of law ; and he who 	1
of profit and trust, and transacted no matter of import- 	1
of property in the kingdom ; but so far as we can trace 	1
of prosecuting such a dangerous design. Soon after 	1
of providing against the danger which threatened them 	1
of provisions, cut off their straggling parties, and so ~~ 	1
of public virtue, as wonderfully suited both the circum- 	1
OF QUEEN MARY AND OF KING JAMES VI. 	1
of rage, which the first account of the rout of his army 	1
of raisins, which he received wrapt up in a paper that he 	1
of rank and reputation, followed by their most trusty 	1
of reestablishing the queen in some degree of power, 	1
of regaining credit, and he did not fail to cultivate and 	1
of regard or of compassion, and the treating her with 	1
of regent, a fuller and more absolute authority than any 	1
of regent y . 	1
of reproof assumed by the first reformers, as well as a 	1
of resentment, it was natural to seek revenge, and to be 	1
of restoring it. She had of late come under new en- 	1
of restoring the popish religion, they wished their own 	1
of Rizio, and the countenance he had given to an action with indif- 	1
of Rome" 1 . 	1
of Ross, who, together with the French and Spanish ~ 	1
of Ross, who was commissioned by them, arrived before 	1
of Royal and Noble Authors, article Essex. 	1
of saint, transferred almost the whole crown lands, 	1
of Scotland, and the favourable reception it met with, 	1
of Scotland, and to prevent the conquest of that king- 	1
of Scotland. The battle of Pinkey had no other effect 	1
of Scotland, was put into my hands by my worthy 	1
of Scotland were so mingled with those of other na- 	1
of Scotland, which we doubt not he will declare unto your majesty at good 	1
of Scotland, who represented the majesty, and pos- 	1
of Scots. She had already experienced what use might 	1
of sculpture, architecture, and painting, by which that age 	1
of sending new reinforcements into Scotland, it became 	1
of several small states, to counterpoize him whose power 	1
of sir R. Cecil with James the sixth. I have not a copy of it, 	1
of some powerful chieftain, who screened him from the 	1
of so much utility to the kingdom ; and which he and 	1
of sovereigns 6 ; and that he might induce him more 	1
of Spain, had set an example to the age of that prudent 	1
of St. Andrew's, and a few others, oppose this cowardly 	1
of St. Andrew's, and other leaders of the party, were 	1
of St. Andrew's were deeper laid, and produced more en ^ t y ^ 	1
of Stirling, he seldom appeared in public, and amused 	1
of success. Her army, which was almost double to the 	1
of succession, called both of them to the throne, upon 	1
of succession in her favour, by a letter to the privy 	1
of success, that when a plan was concerted in the 	1
of such a horrid and detestable crime 9 ; and though 	1
of such an atrocious crime should be committed to .cus- ~~ 	1
of such extraordinary indulgence, might have been ex- 	1
of such historians, none of the points in question could 	1
of such letters as he hath to your majesty from the said Brinstone, and also 	1
oft1ieircoii-l ove f liberty, than to zeal for religion. In the act of 	1
of Tartary and of Arabia ; the savage state of North 	1
often at the person whom she destined to be her hus- 	1
often contemptible. 	1
often declared that nothing but her resolution to lead a 	1
often more crowded than the court of his sovereign. 	1
often obscure and imperfect, and, at this distance of 	1
often present at religious worship, according to the to religion. 	1
often so solicitous to secure their kingdom against the 	1
often start at dangers which exist only in their imagina- 	1
often to destruction. In that age, they overran Italy 	1
of that kind, the eagerness, with which they urged their demand, was 	1
of that nobleman, that he preserved a life of so much 	1
of that nobleman were too well known to expect that 	1
of that party in Scotland became, for this reason, a ne- 	1
of that princess, whose pretensions they favoured, 	1
of that superstition, averse at all times from toleration, 	1
of that zeal against popery, which then possessed the 	1
of the abbot of Melross, a.d. 1535, constituting James the fifth the bailiff 	1
of the adverse faction forced them to publish, what 	1
of the aristocracy remained entire, and its vigour un- 	1
of the barons, were all obliged to carry arms. While 	1
of the blood, had, in their opinion, an undoubted right 	1
of the cardinal of Lorrain, confirmed and encouraged 	1
of the castle of Edinburgh by Mar was confirmed. The 	1
of the chief noblemen in the kingdom should be sent 	1
of the church ; and never to attempt any thing, directly 	1
of the church. Henry had taken great pains to infuse 	1
of the church no less destructive than terrible. 	1
of the church which they had seized. A sum which, at 	1
of the church, which was held this year, bears all the 	1
of the conduct of princes, we are apt to ascribe too 	1
of the confederates to keep her in perpetual imprison- 	1
of the congregation acquit the queen-regent of any breach of 	1
of the congregation could long be concealed, dreaded 	1
of the congregation got the start once more of her vi- 	1
of the congregation, had hitherto prevented the princes 	1
of the congregation, than they experienced the activity, 	1
of the congregation, were appointed to assign, or, as it 	1
of the congregation were desired to send commissioners 	1
of the congregation were not idle. By new associations 	1
of the convocation, by which the principles of the re- 	1
of the corporation ; and the idea of ' representation 1 	1
of the country ; and to put the same in execution under the pain of losing 	1
of the country? Oh yes, said she, a great deal: it seems 	1
of the crown of England, and subjected to all the con- 	1
of the crown was not sufficient to counterbalance the 	1
of the crown were, originally, few in number, and ex- 	1
of the difference betwixt the king and the queen, he had refused to hold 	1
of the different factions. By insinuation, or address, 	1
of the discovery of Babington's conspiracy, before James ap- 	1
of the earl of Angus, to be burnt for the crime of witch- 	1
of the earl of Lennox. That nobleman, having been of marrying 	1
of the ecclesiastical courts was abolished, and the causes, 	1
of the eminence. The depth and closeness of their 	1
of the enemy, and posted to the greatest advantage on 	1
of the English ministers. " There hath been a matter secretly thought of, 	1
of the English monarch added greatly to the violence 	1
of the English peers. Their estates in the northern 	1
of the English ; whatever should be taken from the 	1
of the episcopal function. Their jurisdiction, however, 	1
of the established church were not shaken, and, per- 	1
oftheevents ^^ excessive refinement, we may affirm that their 	1
of the family were retired to their devotions, one of his 	1
of the feudal institutions abated sooner, and its defects 	1
of the feudal system in the other kingdoms of Europe, 	1
of the former treaty, they prepared to besiege it in 	1
of the fourth century, were probably a colony of the 	1
of the greatest events in the history of mankind, and, 	1
of the Greek auth&amp;rs. Such good company will, I am sure, 	1
of the Hawk Hill, a rising ground not far distant from 	1
of the house of commons, and history instead of acts of 	1
of the imperial dignity by a sort of hereditary right. 	1
of the impotence of laws, when opposed to power. So 	1
of the intended relaxation for a handful of catholics, 	1
of their ancient kings and heroes. Had he died a na- 	1
of their authority, during that period, seek to deprive 	1
of their ceremonies, and to borrow from them the or- 	1
of their friends, particularly of Knox, brought about a 	1
of their liberality to the church, and taught them to 	1
of their new strength. The division of that country into 	1
of their own country. Provoked by this insult to him- 	1
of their own generals, no less than the strength of the 	1
of their own strength, they submitted with impatience 	1
of their people. To suffer the ministers of an esta- 	1
of their power, some colour of legal possession to what 	1
of their present misery with their former splendour, 	1
of their revenues and the exercise of their functions. 	1
of their sovereign had accustomed the nobles to inde- 	1
of their sovereigns. Knox, and the other preachers of 	1
of the kingdom afforded Mary an agreeable proof of 	1
of the kingdom; by which the friendship of France 	1
of the kingdom, he met with little reverence from the 	1
of the kingdom, threatened to revenge upon the regent 	1
of the king's murder, and suffered death as traitors. 	1
of the king u . It could scarce be expected that Mary 	1
of the labour of daily preaching, and to have it in my 	1
of the last century, compiled an history of Scotland 	1
of the latter related to matters of more importance, and 	1
of the leaders of the congregation deserves notice. 	1
of the lesser barons repaired in a body to the queen 	1
of the lowest and most illiterate orders, their composi- 	1
of the matter, was perhaps sufficient to have gained Herries from being an 	1
of the meeting were instantly agreed upon. But Eliza- 	1
of them, however, he was immediately reconciled, ex- 	1
of them, in order to strengthen himself, bestowed new 	1
of them in their present dress. 	1
of the motives which had induced them to take arms. 	1
of them to prison. But this severity did not subdue 	1
of the nation frustrated their intentions; eager- to con- 	1
of the nation, Lennox stood alone in a cause where 1567. 	1
of the nation rendered this precaution necessary. In 	1
of the nation. The Scots were held in abhorrence all 	1
of the negotiation at Edinburgh, the sound understand- 	1
of the neighbouring barons ; but, as most of these either 	1
of the nobles, and alarmed others. The queen's fac- 	1
of the nobles, except the earl of Huntly, would subscribe this paper till a 	1
of the nobles ; they even aided their avarice and vio- 	1
of the nobles, they, we are apt to imagine, must have 	1
of the nobles who were assembled at Hamilton, incited 	1
of the occurrences which happened in their reigns. 	1
of the other. The progress she had made in all the 	1
of the palace with an hundred and sixty men; and 	1
of the party, not only restrained this impetuous spirit, 	1
of the people whom he was called to rule, he acted, 	1
of the people, who once revered him as the descendant 	1
of the popish clergy, but with the same ill success which 	1
of the popish clergy. The ecclesiastics, who were allowed to retain their 	1
of the ports of his kingdom ; and, in contempt of the 	1
of the powers which that title conveyed, as explained in the text and note, 	1
of the power to execute such a pernicious scheme. 	1
of the prince's person. Argyll, Athol, Mar, Morton, 	1
of the prior of St. Andrew's, by creating him an earl, 	1
of the prior of St. Andrew's with the greatest jealousy 	1
of the protestant church, by Adam Bothwell, bishop 	1
of the public approbation, it is, perhaps, prudent to 	1
of the public, I can already inform you, upon the authority of 	1
of the public revenues, Suitable to this idea, are the 	1
of the purchasers of former editions, that all the additions 	1
of the queen, and rode off the field with a few follow- bll ed to 	1
of the reformation. Many doctrines of the popish church 	1
of the reformation, we may observe something similar 	1
of the reformers were listened to as so many calls to 	1
of the regent and of her adversaries ; and the king 	1
of the representations concerning the poverty of the clergy, 	1
of the royal apartment, difficulty of access, distance 	1
of the same. Archiv. publ. Edin. 	1
of the Scots, rendered their armies as unfit for sieges, 	1
of the Scottish army became universal and irretrievable. 	1
of the Scottish malecontents were redressed, and they 	1
of the Scottish queen, towards whose title and preten- 	1
of these. If the charge against Mary should appear 	1
of these she resigned the crown, renounced all share in 	1
of the six- litical state of Europe, at that period, where the follow- 	1
of the six queens whom he married. In order to gratify 1559. 	1
of the spirit of that period. 	1
of the subjects would never have been able to shake. 	1
of the summons to appear before the privy council, 	1
of the times, and which the queen reckoned disrespect- 	1
of the times, quietly to digest an affront. As the pro- 	1
of the times. You send out solid wealth, the accumula- 	1
of the unhappy prince had a just right to prefer this 	1
of the vengeance which the Almighty had inflicted 	1
of the violence of Mary's love, or the weakness of her 	1
of the year one thousand five hundred and sixty, in 	1
of this?" 1 &gt;es markable of these, will serve both to explain the political 	1
of this crime. It prevailed chiefly among the French 	1
of this detestable action ; and it is obvious how much 	1
of this fort. The queen's severity, and the place in 	1
of this kind, the Austrian princes rose, in a short time, 	1
of this law discovers the zeal of that assembly ; the first 	1
of this narrative to give an outline of its constitution, 	1
of this national animosity. The Scots, relying on the 	1
of this nature," says he, " the pure effect of your ma- 	1
of this parliament concerning religion. This difficulty, {*"" 	1
of this siege, related by contemporary historians, men 	1
of this supreme court ; and, after the success which had 	1
of those countries, wherein they had farthest exceeded 	1
of those industrious collectors ; and, after all they have 	1
of those laws which he had been guilty of violating. 1 367. 	1
of those who presided in the courts of the barons ; they 	1
of time she kept them in arms, resemble the efforts of 	1
of treason, to disband the forces which they had as- 	1
of treasurer or comptroller of the revenues upon any ~ 	1
of trust or dignity in the kingdom, nor confer the offices 1560. 	1
of truth, and even of probability, as to deserve no serious examination. At 	1
of Tullibardin, and lord Lindsay, contended for the 	1
of union, all the kindred of a nobleman interested them- 	1
of union could not have been concluded on equal terms, 	1
of use to me, and I have availed myself of the permission you 	1
of vassalage and clanship, and tolerated afterwards un- 	1
of very different kinds. Their capacity for business, 	1
of violence. During the queen's absence, on a progress 	1
of virtue, this fatal marriage would remain an incon- 	1
of war to reduce the place by force, or possessed of the 	1
of was admitted by the English, but never recognised 	1
of what is called an honourable resentment, he resolved 	1
of which he was unworthy, and which he had occupied 	1
of which the following were the most considerable. 	1
of widowhood. Her gentle administration had secured r^^ 11 	1
of wisdom and of moderation for conduct so different. 	1
of words and statutes, against the dangerous encroach- 1558. 	1
of your history to be sent over to Suard, and last night 	1
of youth, he became, by degrees, careless of her per- 	1
old-fashioned dangling word wherewith? I should as 	1
old, on the throne. 	1
Old Testament against idolatry, imagined that they 	1
oMary r three different proposals with regard to Mary; that 	1
on a better aspect, he pretended to join them, but 	1
on account of her religion. The court faction, which 	1
on account of his concern in that conspiracy, had fled 	1
on account of their past conduct or present profession ; 	1
on a level with her rebellious subjects, and to stand 	1
on all these accounts, the death of the French monarch 	1
on a whole community, every borough was permitted to 	1
On both these occasions, the national heat and im- 	1
on by command of the king and queen, in order to over- 	1
on by some of her subjects : at this time we often find Elizabeth boasting 	1
once, cancelled the memory of past injuries, and en- 	1
once had, founded on the apprehension of clashing or 	1
once, his cousin Murdo, duke of Albany, and his sons ; 	1
once mentioned. 	1
once more professed himself the vassal of England, and 	1
once more, to anarchy and independence. The power, 	1
one capacity, and dependent in another 5 . The crown 	1
one case with the wisdom of a queen, in the other she 	1
one, devoted to their interest, raised to be regent. This 	1
one generous effort, to rescue their religion and liberty 1569. 	1
one half of his kingdom. But his credulity led him into 	1
one hour, the weakness or treachery of a single man 	1
one hundred and forty-four pounds, current money. . In 1529, a pound 	1
one hundred pounds annually: slender as it was it 	1
one nation, inspired the other with an equal desire of 	1
one of his attendants with part of the money, the queen 	1
one of his majesty's chaplains in ordinary for Scotland; 	1
one of the most able pamphlets which they had read 	1
one of the most renowned of the British historians, 	1
one of them, with their kin, friends, servants, and household-men, well 	1
one of those desperadoes, he was wounded by him in 	1
one of those irregular adventurers in philosophy, of 	1
one prince, by throwing that of another into the oppo- 	1
on equal terms with her, sent Maitland to the English 	1
One small difficulty still remained to be surmounted. 	1
one species of composition, has displayed, on every subject, 	1
One spirit seemed now to animate all orders of men. 	1
One, that Mary should be replaced upon the throne, 	1
one thousand five hundred and forty-seven, with that 	1
one ; to allow her to retire into France, was another ; 	1
on every occasion, a rooted aversion to his person. By 	1
one was daily expected, might prove fatal to public 	1
on her journey thither, the queen heard of young Gor- 1562. 	1
On her return to Edinburgh, Mary began to pro- 	1
on her to imprison and prosecute the archbishop of St. 	1
on him to dismiss the guards which the conspirators had 	1
on his mother's trial and execution ; that he was not really 	1
only are events related, but their causes and effects ex- 	1
only by those who are admitted near the persons of the 	1
only for ten days ; but a committee of the whole house 	1
only full liberty, but was received into the queen's pre- 	1
only : he intended to devote himself to the service of 	1
only innocent but laudable. This message, so mortify- 	1
only object they had now in view. They were animated 	1
only proper course to avoid it. Instead of keeping the 	1
only son, with the young queen of Scots. He commu- 	1
only stated taxes which the feudal law obliged vassals 	1
only suppose eight persons of so numerous a body, as the peers of Scotland 	1
only " till she should take some final order in the mat- 	1
on many occasions, those immense sums, which no peo- 	1
On Mary's arrival in the north, Huntly employed his 	1
On Mary's return to Edinburgh, she summoned her 1565. 	1
on occasion of the want of money for paying the army, 	1
on pretences not unplausible. 	1
on pretext that the regent had exceeded his power, 	1
on some occasions, rather like a viceroy of the French 	1
on that account, because no accuser had appeared, and 	1
on that ac- gjjie an( j their conduct meritorious, considered them 	1
ON THE 	1
on the appearance of great displeasure. Mary, inti- 	1
on the appearance of lord Home, with a body of his ~~ 	1
On the approach of the English army, the queen re- 	1
on the coast to second his land forces. The Scots had, 	1
on the continent by his zeal for religion, and that they 	1
on the continent were warmly interested in her cause. 	1
on the day of trial, that by their presence they might 	1
on the death of her brother, Edward, and soon after 1553&gt; 	1
on the delinquents was remarkable by its unexpected 	1
on the fifteenth of May his marriage with the queen, 	1
on the first day of August, and that assembly be deem- 	1
On the first news of Mary's escape, her friends, Arrives at 	1
on the letters published in Mary's name, the scheme 	1
on the negotiations for obtaining his liberty with ex- 	1
On the ninth of March, Morton entered the court 	1
on the opposite shore, they retreated towards Stirling 	1
on the other, a colony of foreigners settling with their 	1
On the other hand, Elizabeth's partiality towards 	1
On the other hand, in Mary's situation we find some 	1
On the other hand, instead of mitigating the rigour, 	1
On the other hand, Murray and his associates were 	1
On the other side, Henry the eighth, of England, 	1
On the second of February, 1779, multitudes of the 	1
on the tenth of May, proceeded to call to trial the per- P romise 	1
on the twentieth of December of that year, granted an assignation of a con- 	1
on the understanding and on the heart, and how far it 	1
on the very brink of destruction. On Sunday, the ninth 	1
on this occasion. Mary, though surrounded by pro- 	1
on this occasion, other principles obstructed the opera- 	1
On this occasion the earl not only complained, with 	1
on this occasion, were contrived to be representations 	1
On this second blow, the hopes and spirits of the 	1
on this side of the Tweed. 	1
on what footing he stood. To have ventured on a step 	1
on which a structure so stupendous was erected. 	1
on which she bestowed her favour. She acted in the 	1
on your lordship in entering upon that field. My view of it 	1
open and repeated acts of violence, are enumerated at 	1
opened with the utmost solemnity, and all its acts pass- 	1
openly condemned it. A small circumstance might 	1
openly to oppose it. The seeds of discord would, by 	1
operated. A few months after the marriage their do- 	1
operate with greater violence, and proved the occasion, 	1
operations of the campaign with the duke of Norfolk m . 	1
operations which accident had occasioned at Perth, 	1
operation, to choose the actors, and to assign them Perpetrate 	1
opinion of that age, it could be accounted for only by ~ 	1
opinion of the English council, that it would be reason- 	1
opinions, is of no consequence. If the privy counsellors and nobles, attending 	1
oppo&amp;er to become a promoter of the marriage. Perhaps Melvil may have 	1
opportunities of informing himself, could venture to relate 	1
opportunity of mortifying them to escape. Slight of- 	1
oppose. 	1
oppose your conclusions. Though I know that I could exe- 	1
opposing her marriage obliterated the memory of his 	1
opposite gate ; the forces of the congregation were ir- 	1
opposition to this allegation you may be urged with the joint 	1
opposition to this measure spread among the king's 	1
opposition to which he might have given rise ; consented 	1
oppression, and that the ministry of new men and- fa- 	1
oppression exasperated the protestants; the smart of 	1
oppressors, confidence in his favourites, and the most 	1
or any other person should happen to be killed in pro- 	1
or any other place : 	1
or a personal privilege, the encroaching spirit of the 	1
or be convinced by his arguments. They knew that 	1
orbitant and uncommon power, of which instances occur 	1
orbitant power of the nobles, the violence of faction, 	1
or by setting her up again." It is probable Mar refused 	1
or colouring over the absurdity, of the established doc- 	1
or consulting the rest of the nation, must be deemed a 	1
ordained them to protect. The decision of persons 	1
or defending any important conquest. 	1
order and tranquillity were restored to that part of the 	1
order corporeal chastisement to be inflicted on the de- 	1
ordered into the river to secure her escape. The loy- 	1
order making it impossible for the Scots to stand long 	1
order of lineal succession, and transferred the crown to 	1
order, of succession, might be produced, and considered 	1
order of succession was not settled with the same accu- 	1
order, therefore, to prevent his executing any such 	1
order the right upon which she claimed, to be legally 	1
order to accommodate both parties, at once, to secure 	1
order to accomplish which, the greatest excesses of vio- 	1
order to account for this, our historians do little more 	1
order to be present at the conference, was immediately 	1
order to crush him at once, the English monarch en- 	1
order to deliberate what course they should hold in 	1
order to divert him from business, gave him an early 	1
order to evade it. These Mary construed to be acts of ~~ 	1
order to obtain the sole direction of affairs, Bothwell, 	1
order to purchase the secure enjoyment of the remain- 	1
order to put a stop to such dangerous encroachments. 	1
order to revenge the death of a man whom he hated. 	1
order to secure this, he, immediately after the dissolu- 	1
order to support their own men. In this situation a 	1
order to support them. Wherever the opportunity of 	1
order to vindicate the queen's authority from an insult, 	1
order, were gentlemen of the first rank and fortune in 	1
ordinary and unexpected, without some previous strug- 	1
ordination take rise in cities ; and where there are few 	1
or eloquence to induce Elizabeth to take his country 	1
or her artifices, to advance another step. 	1
or her subjects to promise more dutiful obedience for 	1
or his high pretensions, as suitor to the queen n . His 	1
original intention was only to complete his account of 	1
original papers, which give us some idea of the miseries to which some of 	1
origin of Before they sallied out of their own habitations to 	1
origin of the different kingdoms now established there. 	1
or indignation at his measures, were perhaps the mo- 	1
or indirectly, which may tend to its subversion or pre- 	1
ority in number, deterred the malecontents from facing 	1
O r jgi n O f the immediate occasion of this fatal animosity ; the true 	1
or none, and appoint their fight most commonly always afoot. They come 	1
or of experience in the practice of war. Every misfor- 	1
or of his want of courage to seize a crown, deserted him 	1
or of judging concerning them with candour. All par- 	1
or of trust ; they were likewise his companions and fa- 	1
or ornamental, was far beyond what is commonly at- 	1
or parochial consistories ; composed of the ministers, 	1
or, perhaps, of any other age, wore the garb and af- 	1
or pitied the captive queen ; the Roman catholic princes 	1
or reserve. Her partisans were already meditating 	1
or self-defence were no longer the only causes of hos- 	1
or steward of that abbey, vesting in him all the powers which pertained to 	1
or subsequent monarch of Scotland. 	1
or superstition, or attentive only to amusements, de- 	1
or their zeal for public liberty, prompted them to de- 	1
or the religion of the state, nor abolished popery, yet it granted such new 	1
or the tears and entreaties of his father, detained him 	1
or thrice about his neck, not for cold, but for cutting. In their array to- 	1
or to conceal them. Instead of yielding to the fear or 	1
or to make any allowance for what may differ from them 	1
or to offend her irrecoverably ; and, in a matter of so 	1
or to their want of ambition. They were abundantly ^ toTxteii 	1
or to wrest the sceptre out of Elizabeth's hands, might 	1
or two were suspended from the exercise of ecclesiasti- 	1
or was less expected, than his choosing to appear in a 	1
or were entitled to his regard. But James, who both 	1
o t 17 missioners did not fail to reply y . But while the article 	1
other, all our kings had recourse to nearly the same 	1
other, any appearances of moderation which this par- 	1
other barons, he had united against his sovereign almost 	1
other chiefs of the malecontents, resided. Keith, 310. Their flight into the 	1
other civilized country. But the nature of the Scottish 	1
other conclusion than to implore the queen of Eng- 	1
other consent but that of her own subjects, in the 	1
other dignitaries, still adhered to the Romish supersti- 	1
other eminent persons of their party, still adhering to 	1
other hand, I have imputed the violent conduct of the earl of Huntly to a 	1
other, hand, the displeasure of the French king, the 	1
other in octavo. This has induced me to make a general 	1
other kingdom. From Robert Bruce to James the 	1
other method. 	1
other nation. Even in times of profound peace, they 	1
other nobles acted, without question, from a laudable 	1
other papers, upon which was founded the charge of 	1
other people. Barbarians are tenacious of their own 	1
other person could be set in opposition to the cardinal, 	1
other person, delivered their country, though by a 	1
other person who can better execute your intentions than it is 	1
other prince, to grant ; and, by that benefit, bind me 	1
other quarter. This great revolution in Scotland had 	1
others, and intimidated the rest. When the term of 	1
others devoured, in expectation, the wealthy benefices 	1
others. Her emissaries were every where at work, and, 	1
other side of Forth. Conscious, on both sides, of guilt, 	1
other so nigh as space and place will suffer, through the whole ward, so 	1
others, suspected of the same crime, to appear before a 	1
others, were appointed to attend them as assistants. 	1
others with bolder and more desperate thoughts, and 	1
other than they might have expected. He was treated 	1
other to refuse, the ratification of the treaty in its ori- 	1
other translator. Your History of Scotland is translated, 	1
other, which long inflamed both. Their national anti- 	1
other, who had treated his son with the utmost con- 	1
otherwise have enjoyed in common with the public, 	1
ought neither to be praised nor censured without great 	1
ought to account for this conduct to my readers ; and 	1
our ancestors contended and suffered." 	1
our British story ; the views you open of policy, manners, and 	1
our friend Mr. Adam Smith, would powerfully attract me. 	1
Our friend Smith 3 is very successful here, and Gerard b is 	1
Our friend, Wedderburn, is advancing with great strides in 	1
our historians, by his command. Albany, apprehen- 	1
Our historians have been more careful to relate the Robert the 	1
our historians mention with astonishment this circum- 	1
our history. Your resolution to assert the authenticity of 	1
our kings were indebted for the success with which they 	1
our lands, and with these we will defend them.' The 	1
Our noble friend, lord Loughborough, has endeavoured to 	1
our notice ; as it gives a just idea of the military discipline of the Scots, at 	1
our own, convey wisdom at our expense to future ge- 	1
our princes. Ilenault's Abre"g, p. 617, etc. De 1'Esprit des Loix, liv. 	1
our princes. James the first led the way here, as well 	1
our sentiments both in religion and politics, I live in 	1
ous 11 . To these he added that insolence, which the 	1
ous and ineffectual; but whoever ruled at court, he 	1
ous, being founded entirely on the royal proclamation 	1
ous conclusion, or whatever name its determinations 	1
ous correspondence with foreign catholics. She had 	1
ous expression which Cecil had inserted into the treaty, 	1
ously circulated representing the catholics as idolaters. 	1
ously of bestowing him upon another. It was not her 	1
ous pretences, still contrived to gain time, and to elude 	1
ous spirit prevailed in this parliament, as in that of the 	1
ous terms, that if Mary's choice of a husband should 	1
out any effect. There was no reason to expect that 	1
out derogating from the honour of the prince. The Articles of 	1
out effect. They employed the mediation of the as- 	1
out granting any terms, either to themselves or to the 	1
out jealousy and distrust. The prior of St. Andrew's, 	1
out meeting resistance, which shook or overturned his 	1
out-numbered their adversaries, the latter opinion pre- 	1
out of office ; and, on her retiring to Stirling, she left 	1
out of Perth, under the earl of Argyll and prior of St. 	1
out of policy, that ambitious princess would never ad- 	1
out of regard to decency, and in order to encourage 	1
out of Scotland, a letter to him, whereby she sent him word, 	1
out of the hands of lord Fleming, the governor ; but if 	1
out of the hands to which she had already committed it. 	1
out of the kingdom. And, upon their urging her for- 	1
outrage, the houses and lands of those whom they 	1
out (Remarks on the History of Scotland, ch. 9,) a considerable errour into 	1
out resistance. 	1
out so ample a page for the former. For my part, I 	1
out some benefit to the Scots, by compelling the Eng- 	1
out some knowledge of the various and extraordinary 	1
out their concurrence, they trusted that they might 	1
out their lands among their followers, and annexed the 	1
out the lands which they had conquered, it was natural 	1
out whose assistance he could not with safety venture 	1
out your guidance, I must take advantage of the friendly offer 	1
over by that court with a small supply of money, in 	1
over Europe ; they durst hardly appear any where in 	1
over in silence. 	1
over many more. The regent himself was weak enough 	1
over-match for errour. Absurdities, which had long im- 	1
over our more recent transactions. This was occasioned 	1
over Scotland. But his own experience, and the ex- 	1
over so many to his interest, during the minority of 	1
over the inhabitants, which was hereditary in the po- 	1
over the queen; and, in a situation such as Mary's, 	1
over the sheets from London as they came from the press ; I 	1
over to her interest, and then employed, as the most 	1
overtures towards an accommodation. But Mary, who 	1
overtures were extorted by the importunity of Fenelon, 	1
overture was made to him, in the name of the French 	1
overturned the altars, defaced the pictures, broke in 	1
owed his grandeur. Though remarkable neither for 	1
owe its rise and progress to the jealousy and malice of 	1
owe to the people. Knox was not backward to justify 	1
own apartment. She endeavoured to draw from him 	1
own conduct, fortified this resolution. Enraged at the 	1
own confession, to have been mere artifice and deceit. 	1
own countrymen than to the English. To restrain and 	1
own court ". James the fourth, on pretence of remedy- 	1
own defence. Erskine, enraged at having been made 	1
own expense, were found to be unfit either for making 	1
own eye. For this purpose, she first employed all her Prevails on 	1
own family, two of the most noted preachers of the 	1
own grievances than to annoy the enemy ; and with a 	1
own habitations. A few only of the more zealous or 	1
own hands almost all those which became vacant, ex- 	1
own houses. Keith, 304. Murray was still at St. Andrew's on July 22. 	1
own house without a numerous retinue of armed fol- 	1
own inclination as in conformity to the spirit of his in- 	1
own innocence, and of the falsehood of the accusa- 	1
own kingdom, or, at least, be left at full liberty to seek 	1
own kingdom was the great object of Elizabeth's policy; 	1
own liberty. The parliament of Scotland, however, in- 	1
own morals, and the doctrines of the church, by the 	1
own. Not long after, she confined the countess of 	1
own partisans, and possess their own merit, without 	1
own part, I think it besides, a composition of uncommon 	1
own person could be safe in a country where the mur- 	1
own power. 	1
own power to break off the match g . Nor were the 	1
own rank, the splendour of her former marriage, and 	1
own resident in Scotland ; in order to add more dignity 	1
own subjects, and imploring that pity and assistance h er . re 	1
own subjects, and threatened by them with the loss of 	1
own title. If the activity of her emissaries had gained 	1
own troops had leisure to recollect themselves, or to 	1
own voluntary deed. It is still more surprising to find Lesley ascribing 	1
own weakness, the members put an end to their debates, 	1
own* wife nan ds, it would have been unbecoming either a poli- 	1
OXFORD. 	1
p. 199, etc. e Anders, i. 132. Appendix, No. XX. 	1
P2 	1
p. 278 ; the instructions of Elizabeth to Randolph her agent, put it beyond 	1
p. 32. 	1
pable, nor had any thoughts, of usurping more. Eng- 	1
pable of improving this favourable conjuncture. Ad- 	1
pace, she reached it next morning. 	1
pacific character of ecclesiastics with some degree of 	1
page 131 of this volume, is taken into consideration. 	1
pages 82 and 83. The instructions of the privy council of England to 	1
paid so little regard to his orders, and returned abruptly 	1
painter, and a few of his friends ; but soon attracted so 	1
palace, and guarded the queen with the utmost 	1
palities were gradually formed into one kingdom, the 	1
pality within the kingdom ; and, forbidding his vassals 	1
P Anders, vol. iv. part ii. 134. Cabbala, 157. 	1
P Anders, vol. iv. part ii. 52. q Haynes, 478. 	1
panied them in other sciences, and discovered every 	1
panied with a promise, but expressed in very ambigu- 	1
panies successful love, Mary did not suffer the course 	1
pany. I have little paper remaining and less time ; and 	1
papal throne, science and philosophy had laid open, to 	1
papal usurpation, which had proved so efficacious in 	1
paper, containing a formal approbation of her marriage 	1
paper in the year 1570. Haynes, 621. This act is perfectly conformable 	1
papers. 	1
papers of Dr. Robertson, were first published by Mr. 	1
papers, some of which still remain* 1 . The arms of 	1
Papers were affixed to the most public places of the 	1
Papers, which are printed, the matter is put beyond all ques- 	1
parable. terrupt the domestic union, without dissolving it alto- 	1
parallel in history. They overcame the fear of death, 	1
pardoning of the earl of Murray and his associates, as 	1
pardon treason, or to alienate lands annexed to the 	1
pardon under the great seal. By the laws of Scotland 	1
pardon with the most humble submission. 	1
pare herself with the Scottish queen q ; and, as it was 	1
paring a yoke, to which, without some timely exertion 	1
Paris, 1st December, 1763. 	1
Paris, and one of the most sagacious ministers employed by Elizabeth, 	1
Paris. By means of this the sheets of your book will be 	1
Paris, the 30th of May, 1768. 	1
Parl. 6. Q. Mary, c. 60. 	1
parliament 1 , to receive all supplications, etc. and, rejecting what they 	1
parliamentary acknowledgment of his right of succes- 	1
parliament. But, without having recourse to any of 	1
parliament ; for, after offending Bothwell, he retired from court ; he allowed 	1
parliament h . 	1
parliament. In Scotland, all the bishoprics, and those 	1
parliament might have had to proceed to such a rigor- 	1
parliament must be interposed to bestow it, he wanted 	1
parliament, repealing all the laws, canon, civil, and mu- 	1
parliament, the hopes and fears, the prejudices and passions 	1
parliament, to register the value of lands throughout 	1
parliament was the consequence of their liberty, and of 	1
parliament, we should not by the latter have furnished 	1
parliament, which had been called to meet on the fourth 	1
parochial duty could be committed, was still extremely 	1
paroit tres-dispose a traduire 1'Histoire d'Ecosse que vient de 	1
part 2. 5. This differs from Buchanan's account, who supposes that all 	1
part 3 . All these considerations concurred in deter- 	1
part ac- 	1
part he took in the debates of the general assembly of 	1
partiality, and that she might not drive Mary into any 	1
partiality distinguished him on every occasion. She 	1
participation of her secret councils. Under the appear- 	1
particular and careful inquiry. The reformation is one 	1
Particularly I could almost undertake to convince you, that 	1
particularly requisite to preserve a symmetry between 	1
particularly the clergy, by acts of indulgence and favour. On the third of 	1
particular or laborious inquiry. In the third period, 	1
particulars are found in this journal, from which sir John Hayward has 	1
particulars are only designed for the ear of friendship. 	1
parties agreed to acquiesce in his decree. This had 	1
parties, and the balance was often so nicely adjusted, 	1
parties, and who can view the secret workings of the 	1
parties^ consented to this conference, and the issue to which 	1
parties for peace had not suggested an expedient, which 	1
parties. In order to this, the Scots engaged never to 	1
parties, or to mollify the fierceness of their hatred, by 	1
parties which she despatched to take possession of 	1
parties, which were animated against each other with 	1
part in the conduct of difficult affairs. On the twenty- 	1
partly by the necessity of their affairs, and partly by 	1
part of Fife. The barons from the neighbouring coun- 	1
part of her administration, alienated from her the affec- 	1
part of the French auxiliaries which had as yet arrived. 	1
part of the history, than I do what to ask, and therefore I 	1
part of their forces ; and, to ascertain their faithful *~ 	1
part of the leaders, retired into Fife. The duke of 	1
part of the negotiation intrusted to their care. The 	1
part of the peers, either directly or tacitly, approved 	1
part of these revenues, and to those abbots and priors 	1
part of these, Switzerland and Germany opened a se- 	1
part only of her forces was assembled. Huntly, Ogil- 	1
parts of the country ; the promoting strangers to offices 	1
parts of the island, ought now to make a similar con- 	1
parts of the kingdom. These, as the name implies, 	1
parts of the kingdom to meet their new allies ; and 	1
parts of the low countries, where the popular form of 	1
parts, they undertook to procure the crown matrimo- 	1
parture, Mary invested him with the high dignity of 	1
part, which was given up, in order to silence the cla- 	1
party ; but, since the meeting of parliament held in 	1
party, depended on his choice, the regent's most faith- 	1
party. his usual expedition, and marched to Glasgow. The 	1
party, however, though its numbers were formidable, 	1
party. In mere despair, some of the more zealous at- 	1
party in the nation for such a step ; the French general 	1
party is astonishing. From the death of Mr. Patrick 	1
party, that the regent would have found it difficult to 	1
party, that they were able to restrain the zeal of a fiery 	1
party, the interests of the other were not neglected. 	1
party the splendour and authority of the royal name e . 	1
party; they entered into new bonds of association; 	1
party, to communicate their scheme to the queen, and 	1
party, was employed in this embassy. In his absence, 	1
party, whose friendship she had been obliged to court, 	1
pasquinades daily multiplied, a law passed, whereby 	1
passage. At his back was Ruthven, dad in complete 	1
passages in Buchanan, that the French, and Scots in 	1
passed between James and Courcelles upon the first rumour 	1
passed in queen Elizabeth's days ; who, that has not the best 	1
passed in the interval. And thus the affair is happily 	1
passed sentence upon them by an act in form ; and per- 	1
passed through the channel of this committee ; every 	1
passion, ambition to obtain the matrimonial crown. He 	1
passion. An affair which had been the object of so 	1
passion, but was founded so much in nature and true 	1
passion for the liberty of his country, prompted him 1570. 	1
passion for the queen, and envy at those who governed 	1
passions and prejudices of our day, perhaps with no 	1
passions, nor to taste those joys which fill the heart of 	1
passions of men. Almost every war in Europe became 	1
passion. This dictated that uncommon statute, by which 	1
pass, they hoped, for an act of obedience to the king; 	1
pass through the Fifeland, as he doth sundry times in his way to St. An- 	1
pass with impunity ; they dealt out the patrimony of the 	1
pass with impunity, they were universally reproached 	1
paternal estate had been restored to him when he was 	1
pathies were excited, not only by the usual circum- 	1
patience of a fierce age ; and nothing but a bold hand 	1
patient, it brooked no delay : severe and inflexible, it 	1
patiently expected in France ; and that he himself expected 	1
patrimony and revenues of the crown were almost totally 	1
patrimony of the church, or, at least, as much of it as 	1
patrimony of the church, which is there insinuated, met 1561. 	1
patriots remonstrate against such extravagant conces- ^^ P ur * 	1
patronage, was strenuous and constant in its defence^; 	1
patronised the papists : among these the principal of 	1
P Burn. Hist. Ref. vol. i. p. 7. 	1
P Casteln. 461. -" ; 	1
P Coiwei Vita Marizc, ap. Jebb, vol. ii. p. 51. 	1
peace; and from this, as well as other causes, con- 	1
peace, both prevented the garrison of Leith from re- 	1
Peace Henry was no stranger to Warwick's situation, and 	1
peace, lately agreed upon, which, being extorted by 	1
peace, of justice, and of elegance, would have rendered 	1
peace, subsisted chiefly by spoil and pillage ; and, being 	1
peace was restored he returned to his parochial duties ; 	1
pealed to as the common judge of all Christian princes, 	1
peal lay from the judges and courts of the barons, to 	1
peal of the penal statutes of king William to Scotland, 	1
peal to the same manuscripts to give extracts of them, and to 	1
pearances ; if any French fleet should attempt to land, 	1
pearances of good faith with England, he was obliged 	1
peared in a very different light. Besides their manifest gainst 5 	1
peared in the parliaments of that nation, before they 	1
peared on that account. 	1
peared the representatives of almost all the boroughs, 	1
peared to me more evident. Your chief objection, I see, 	1
peared to take possession of the dignity conferred upon 	1
pear only in the sunshine of prosperity, retired to 	1
pears to have pursued his studies with a perseverance 	1
peated". A woman, young, beautiful, and in distress, 	1
peated promises of assisting her, as soon as she could 	1
Pec. 14, The French king, accordingly, applied to the parlia- 	1
pected. 	1
pected a more generous concern for the success of reli- 	1
pected, and a stain was left on their honour. That 	1
pected, and no suitable preparation had been made for 	1
pected from the zeal of the preachers, and from the 	1
pected that so many kind speeches would at last be Elizabeth's 	1
pected. The distance between York and London, and 	1
pectetUf 8 had contrrve d an ^ executed this execrable deed. The 	1
pect from the course of nature ; and this exile, which I do 	1
pect of a long and feeble minority invited to faction, by 	1
pect of an accommodation was, for these reasons, highly 	1
pects villany among his prentices and journeymen ; and has . 	1
pect, that this was a mutual convention between us. How- 	1
pect, unless I shall be enabled to consecrate my whole 	1
peculiar to that age. William, the sixth earl of Doug- 	1
peculiar to the royal family. The opposition she had 	1
pedients fallen upon for their subsistence had hitherto 	1
pedient, which they had often employed with success. 	1
peers only ; and, therefore, his vassals were bound to 	1
peers were appointed to choose eight bishops, and the bishops eight peers; 	1
Pembroke, Leicester, and lord Lumley, subscribed a 	1
penalty, too, by which the decisions of these courts 	1
pendence ; and, during the late commotions, they had 	1
pendence. In such places did the Scottish nobles 	1
pendence were now within his reach, and his industry 	1
pendence. William, surnamed the Lion, being taken 	1
pendent, among whom the causes of discord were many 	1
pendent, bore with impatience a yoke, to which they 	1
pendent queen, and the heir of an ancient race of 	1
pendents, whom, in return, they were bound to pro- 	1
pends. This part of her conduct does little honour to 	1
pened in the beginning of next year, after a reign of 	1
pened to be drawn up in sight, attacked the Scots in 	1
penetrating eye of Elizabeth, who, for this reason, had 	1
pensation before the celebration of the marriage. For 	1
pensations in criminal cases; and to think of some 	1
pense of attending, according to the fashion of the times, 	1
pension of hostilities, from the twenty-fourth of July to 	1
pentance for his rashness in espousing such a desperate 	1
pent my having resisted so many solicitations to alter 	1
penurious supply, to which the lords of the congrega- 	1
people, and, in person, heard and determined all con- 	1
people, at peace with the whole world. The anarchy 	1
people d . Their rage rose to such an height, that the 	1
people for whom laws are made, should be attended to 	1
people, satisfied with enjoying those discoveries in se- 	1
people, what their importunity or their violence could 	1
perate men, the friends or followers of those who had 	1
perceive the least appearance,) you are certainly too short 	1
pered at court ; and Elizabeth calling the duke into the dukeV 	1
peremptorily required that he should again deliver him- 	1
peremptus, invitus nigrum subito descendit in orcum." Burn. Hist, of 	1
perfection in England than in Scotland ; as the rigour 	1
perhaps, dreaded the duke, as a rival in power. All 	1
perhaps, to recommend himself to the catholic princes 	1
periods : to give a view of the political state of the king- r * e 	1
period that has elapsed since that time. These were obtained by the sons 	1
perior of their lands and the chief of their blood, and 	1
perior to his had been exercised, for many years, was 	1
perious temper, and alternate persecutions of the zealots 	1
perity did not rise to any great height, it had, however, 	1
perity, he had taken such steps as gave rise to an open 	1
permission of both sovereigns ; no sooner did Lennox, 	1
permit me to repeat, but which it allowed me very deliciously 	1
permitting them to elect representatives : the exemption 	1
permitting them to exercise the rites of popish worship, were now revoked 	1
permitting this, however, would have been destructive 	1
perous situation, she determined to bring to a period 	1
perpetual leases of lands and tithes, gave, to the utmost 	1
perquisites of their office ; when embassies to foreign 	1
pers concerning it have been found in Cecil's Collection, the great storehouse 	1
persecution against the reformed; sentenced to the. 	1
persed, and without a leader, at his mercy. He seemed 	1
persed ; and, with the poor remains of a ruined party, 	1
persevering importunity, and the other evaded with 	1
persisted in her present method of proceeding' 1 . 	1
persisted in his design of retiring into foreign parts, 	1
persisted, notwithstanding, in his sullenness and obsti- 	1
person 1 ". In order to render this security more perfect, 	1
personages, in the sixteenth century. 	1
personal bravery, he added great skill in the art of war, 	1
personal jealousy and discord, which embittered the 	1
personal security, on which he had relied, committed 	1
person. anc j uncertain. The queen had committed her son to 	1
person and cause to Mary's friendship and protection . 	1
person, as she excelled her in political abilities and in 	1
person at pleasure. Many consultations were held, 	1
person chosen for this important service, and extraor- 	1
person in whom he placed the greatest confidence, con- 	1
person of the sovereign. By the assistance of the Eng- 	1
person of the young prince in his hands, and imme- 	1
persons, and at all seasons. They could employ all the 	1
persons of considerable figure, were employed to com- 	1
persons of the greatest distinction. The earl, though 	1
persons should be appointed to attend him by turns, 	1
persons, to be chosen out of twenty-four named by par- 	1
persons who, both at that time and ever after, possess- 	1
person to appear in arms within the precincts of the 	1
person who delivered it 3 . Mary vindicated her own 	1
person who should discover those who had been guilty 	1
persuade a man voluntarily to abdicate the supreme 	1
persuaded his constant and liberal kindness would more than 	1
persuaded men to adhere to a church so indigent and 	1
persuasion and correct argument. 	1
persuasion of her guilt, and so great the violence of 	1
Perth, and, by that rash action, once more threw the 	1
perty extended the influence of the clergy. Many es- 	1
perusing the annals again, and the opinion I had formed of 	1
petitors ready to sacrifice their country in order to ob- 	1
petitors, to acknowledge Scotland to be a fief of the 	1
petty princes, possessing extensive jurisdictions, almost 	1
petual amity with England, without urging or pursuing 	1
petual hostility, or enjoying at best an insecure peace, 	1
petuate his power. But an active and high-spirited 	1
petuosity natural to Scotsmen, and with the fierceness 	1
petuosity of the Scots saved the English, and precipi- 	1
P Even the historians of that age acknowledge, that the marriage of the 	1
P Good. vol. ii. 141. i Anders, vol. i. 94. 	1
P Good. vol. ii. 352. i&gt; Anders. Pref. 60. See Appendix, No. XIX. 	1
P Haynes, 525. 597. 	1
phers is inclined to esteem rather a disgrace than an 	1
Philip the second, though no less apprehensive of 	1
Philip was obliged, on some occasions, to mitigate the 	1
philosophy, he was but little known. The archbishop, 	1
phin. Amiable as the queen of Scots then was, in the 	1
picion of a design, either to obstruct the passage, or to 	1
picion of a design to alter the order of succession, and 	1
Picts. At length, Kenneth the second, the sixty-ninth A. D. 838. 	1
pidly towards Edinburgh with a numerous army. But 	1
piece particularly relative to the conspiracy. I beg you may 	1
pieces the images ; and proceeding next to the monas- 	1
pies, in proof of this observation k . The public indig- ~~ 	1
pillars on which the power of the aristocracy rested. 	1
pily, mistook his motion for a flight, and fell into confu- 	1
piness and glory. 	1
P In the first edition of this work, I expressed my suspicion of a corre- 	1
pire, the situation of the primitive church, prior to its 	1
pire, to recall those legions which guarded the frontier 	1
piring princess. 	1
pists, and went so far as to show some desire to hear 	1
Pitt stood indebted for his noble powers of eloquence : 	1
P Keith, 309, 310. 	1
P Keith, 430. Crawf. Mem. 38. n Keith, 437. 	1
P Keith, Append. 175. Knox, 194. 	1
place ; and, as it was found expedient to change the 	1
place, but admitted into the presence of the queen, 	1
placed him at the school of Dalkeith. Of his advance- 	1
placed in authority over them. Every court is bound 	1
placed in similar situations. When we take a view of 	1
place, dispersed her slender train without resistance, 	1
placed on lier person ; and that same night he made his March 11. 	1
placed on the deck, she there waited the return of day 	1
place, her correspondence with her friends in Scot- 	1
place me in an easy and even affluent situation ; but these 	1
place of resort to all the Roman catholics, to the dis- 	1
places. I lived several years happy with my brother at Nine- 	1
place. The partiality and zeal of the people over- 	1
place whence it came. The dead body of the king, 	1
place where he would be more immediately under her 	1
place where I am planted. How much more so, when it is 	1
placing garrisons in the towns on the frontier; nor 	1
plain ; and if the king's ministers had not been men of 	1
plained ; the characters of the actors are displayed ; 	1
plainly James's interest to accept this invitation ; the as- 	1
plainly shows, that some such design was in hand, and Randolph did not 	1
plainly the dupes of Elizabeth's policy. She talked in 	1
plaint, which the malecontents often repeated, was not altogether destitute 	1
plan. Meanwhile they observed the tendency of his 	1
planofhum-sidered as common to all our princes, we shall find, by 	1
plan, the earls of Angus, Huntly, Lennox, followed by 	1
plated with horrour the barbarism of her own country, 	1
plate with pleasure the superiority of my colleagues. Will 	1
played the strength of mind and constancy of virtue 	1
plays in this letter, but let it be recollected that it was 	1
pleaded, that the infamy of the marriage with Bothwell 	1
ple; and, by their prudent advice, Mary conducted 	1
pleased to allow me the perusal. 	1
please order to be given to my servant. Whatever you send 	1
Pleaseth your highness to understand, that this day arrived with me, the 	1
pleasure against a member of the house of commons, 	1
pleasure ; and, by keeping her rival unmarried, she 	1
pleasure and elegance with his ambition ; and, though 	1
ples, authorities, and examples, were all drawn from ancient writers. The 	1
ples either of diffidence or of duty. Murray wanted 	1
ples of severity of which they themselves had so justly 	1
ples, they were no longer under the necessity of acting 	1
plete ; and her artifice for this purpose was as mean, 	1
ple ; they are roused only by what they feel, not by 	1
pleting his first plan of marrying her to his son. The 	1
ple, without trade and liberty, are able to contribute. 	1
plexing. 	1
pliance with their solicitations, he set out for his native 	1
plicable. That reconcilement with her husband, of 	1
plices in the murder of cardinal Beatoun, was reversed r : 	1
plied them entirely to his own use. The proposal, made 	1
plied the place of the authentic annals of the kingdom. 	1
plifying the success of industry accompanied with vir- 	1
pline and jurisdiction, would have easily obtained the 	1
plish them. The protestants accordingly, though this 	1
plored Elizabeth's justice against the queen of Scots, 	1
ployed in religious meditations and exercises. She even 	1
ployed in that kingdom f . 	1
ployed to find the proper passages ; for I cannot find them. 	1
ploy his best offices towards reconciling Mary to her husband, which she 	1
ploy to distress him. Upon these grounds he esta- 	1
plume myself on the friendship of Dr. Robertson, but must 	1
pointed, an attempt was made to the same purpose, by Mary's 	1
pointed; and if the king's courts called any person 	1
pointed ; but the executing of it was wonderfully pre- 	1
pointed by the nobles themselves, their vassals were 	1
pointed by the other fugitives to wait on Elizabeth, 	1
pointed the earl of Murray regent, and conferred upon 	1
pointed them to hold courts for determining civil causes 	1
pointed to defend his person; and destitute of that 	1
pointing the other. In this situation, and without such 	1
pointment, Knox, and some, other preachers, taking 	1
point of history, nor how much I expect to profit by it. I 	1
point of so much delicacy to be touched. 	1
points him out as a person who was to be dreaded and observed. " The 	1
points in dispute between that kingdom and England 	1
points out such inconsistencies, as features of the age 	1
points where I have not the good fortune to agree with you, 	1
policy ; and combined among themselves in the closest 	1
policy and the scruples of pride. These hopes induced 	1
policy ; and would have justified all the imputations of 	1
policy had not been extremely short-sighted, if he had 	1
policy of Henry the seventh of England, produced the 	1
policy, or introduced by the Irish colony above-men- 	1
policy, that it subsisted between then* posterity for se- 	1
polite reception of her guests, she was sometimes 	1
political considerations in bringing her to this resolu- 	1
political fears and jealousies; none interested more 	1
politics had been brought about. A league with Eng- 	1
poor American paper. However, you have the mercan- 	1
popery; and besought the parliament to interpose its 	1
popery ; a passionate attachment to that superstition is 	1
popery being now somewhat gratified, they turned it 	1
Popery is a species of false religion, remarkable for 	1
popery. these, and her promises of redress, were more satisfying 	1
popish bishop, together with the chapel attached to it, 	1
popish church ; and, without entering into any more 	1
popish church in Scotland. Henry had loosened the 	1
popish clergy themselves. An .exact account of the 	1
popish ecclesiastics, who were absolutely devoted to the 	1
popish princes, who had engaged in the league of 	1
popish religion g . The boldness with which Craig, the 	1
popish writers, the most open and scandalous dissolute- 	1
popular assemblies. Stewart ascribes the entrance of 	1
popular as the earl of Murray, invited him back to 	1
popularity found it an easy matter to raise an army. 	1
poral lords and burgesses, as would unite in opposition 	1
poral, of knights of the shires, and of burgesses. As 	1
poraries ; he excelled eminently in such arts as add 	1
porary historians, but extremely remarkable for the dis- 	1
porary, or depending upon the queen taking such final order. Parl. 1. 	1
porary protection of opinions which she disapproved, 	1
porary regulation. From that period, neither the soli- 	1
porate in foreign expeditions, which, if they brought 	1
portance, and address much less insinuating than Both- 	1
portance ; but she had reason to fear that it would not 	1
portance it was to gain a subject so powerful, and so 	1
portance to their party. Having assembled six hundred 	1
portant a prize; and, as his own insatiable ambition 	1
ported by him. Notwithstanding the silence of con- 	1
port his new honour, bestowed upon him, at the same 	1
portion of land which he still retained in his own hands 	1
portion that was consistent with the happiness of the 	1
portion to their present exigencies, could be obtained. 	1
ports of her indignation, Mary resolved no longer to 	1
portunity offered of taking vengeance. What most displeased 	1
posal entirely undeceived her. She plainly perceived 	1
posals, and to accept of theirs. On his side, he con- 	1
pose, and readily approved of every scheme which was 	1
pose a personal interview with him at York. It was 	1
posed as a spectacle to her own subjects, and led to 	1
posed him ; but he was a stranger to these gentle arts. 	1
posed in a company of literati, when I inquired concerning 	1
posed, lost all hopes of gaining ground, and began to 	1
posed Mary's enjoying the exercise of her religion; 	1
posed on the ignorance and credulity of mankind, were 	1
posed to marry the Scottish queen to the archduke 	1
posed undertaking. 	1
posed with nobleness, with dignity, with elegance, and 	1
pose. Monluc, bishop of Valence, and of the sieur de Randan. 	1
poses that Bothwell was hated by Murray, Morton, etc. who had been his 	1
pose to bring her government into disreputation, la- 	1
posing them unfit for those stations, which their ances- 	1
posite. But as his messenger returned, he was inter- 	1
position in behalf of the queen, and that she, elated 	1
position of her people rendering it necessary to treat 	1
position to that of the Scottish queen. Elizabeth was 	1
position towards them. Though joined with them for 	1
possessed by the younger sons and descendants of the 	1
possessed of a right to be present, either in person or 	1
possessed of. The principal is, with regard to her last in- 	1
possessed that great privilege, would naturally be soli- 	1
possessed, was the object of jealousy to the nobles. 	1
possessing, till my return, the copy of your history, 	1
possession, before I can set to work with that parti- 	1
possession of her legal authority. The success with 	1
possession of it, preached publicly under their protec- 	1
possession of their estates and honours ; and to hold a 	1
possession of the pulpits, which had been abandoned 	1
possession of too much power. Something more auda- 	1
possessions into the hands of the church. Nor was 	1
possessions of the kings of England, and did homage 	1
possession, were razed; and peace between the two 	1
possibility of maintaining order and tranquillity among 	1
possible for me to do. 	1
possible, more merited. The close of the session 	1
possible, that I had time to show it to Blair. I am, with 	1
possible to compass their ruin, without violating the 	1
possible, to surmount them by devoting some part of 	1
possible, to Tuthbury in Staffordshire, and commit her 	1
possibly be founded. The articles were only two ; indemnity 	1
posterity . 	1
posterity; as almost every event in Mary's reign has 	1
posterity will never separate. I shall not therefore at- 	1
posterity with you ; you, in your place, in the great road of 	1
posture, on that height of fortune whence she had 	1
pounds a year ; the last person who had held it was 	1
poverty and obscurity to riches and eminence, they 	1
power. 	1
power; and, being favoured by many fortunate inci- 	1
power and credit at home. Self-preservation, therefore, 	1
power and dignity, were generally bestowed on them. 	1
power and favour of these minions with indignation. 	1
power ; and neither of them would have been inferior 	1
power and popularity of the queen dowager, the dis- 	1
power and privileges upon the great men whose aid he 	1
power. But as my chief residence must still be in 	1
power. But, however abrupt their proceedings may 	1
power. But the legal steps towards accomplishing this 	1
power, by the manner in which he issued his writs, for 	1
power, conspiracies against her favourites, jealousy, in- 	1
powered her commissioners to give him that satisfac- 	1
powered to summon such as had obtained crown lands 	1
power. From the earliest ages of the monarchy, to the 	1
powerful county in the kingdom, and most devoted to 	1
powerful families in England, or should publicly profess 	1
powerful kingdoms. Six princes of Lorrain, her uncles, 	1
powerful ties between a king and his subjects, all o 	1
power. Great offenders despised their authority; 	1
power had been acquired with too much violence, and 	1
power. He addressed himself, therefore, to the pope, 	1
power. He gained some of his colleagues, removed 	1
power into their own hands, made this privilege of so 	1
power might be employed to oppress their religion and 	1
power of her rival. But, in a matter of so much con- 	1
power of persuasion to men of slender acquirements 	1
power of proceeding to more violent extremes. 	1
power of supplying the Scottish malecontents, accord- 	1
power of the aristocracy, and that, without some new 	1
power of the conspirators at defiance. 	1
power of the nobles, led him early to imitate his pre- 	1
power of the one faction entirely to suppress the other, 	1
power of the protestants, who all adhered to the queen 	1
power of this country and its allies. I did not think it 	1
power she still felt and dreaded ; and the insult which 	1
powers which providence vouchsafed him, than by any 	1
powers which the lords of session enjoyed were vested 	1
power. The kingdom had long been under the govern- 	1
power. The marine of France had been utterly neg- 	1
power. This power did not long remain inactive in their 	1
power to apply myself wholly to my studies. This the 	1
power; to descend to a level with those, above whom 	1
power, to divert them from it. This encouraged Nor- 	1
power, to renounce lucrative errour, are sacrifices, which 	1
power to repress or resist the fury of the people. They say plainly, I shall 	1
power was so great, could not fail of being turbulent 	1
power, which always predominated in the Scottish go- 	1
power which rose above its due proportion. Revenge 	1
power, which the fickleness of the regent, or the am- 	1
power which the French possessed in the kingdom, and 	1
pox was the disease with which the king was seized. He is called a 	1
practice, are viewed by its members without shame or 	1
practice of Elizabeth's ministers to prepare memorials, 	1
practices which were carrying on to disturb the admi- 	1
praise of justice and humanity, which was hitherto due 	1
praises bestowed on the king's piety both by Courcelles and 	1
preach against the errours of popery with attention 	1
preacher, and, in any degree, promote the cause of 	1
preachers against popery in Scotland, of whom several 	1
precautions 	1
precaution which prudence could dictate, for preserv- 	1
precedented stretch of prerogative, as the substituting 	1
precipitancy, the one d.eclared the marriage to be 	1
precipitant, but inflexible in all their resolutions, they 	1
precipitated Huntly into open rebellion. As the queen 	1
precipitation to the boat which was prepared for her, 	1
precipitation with which she had concluded the mar- 	1
PREFACE. Ixi 	1
PREFACE. lix 	1
PREFACE TO THE ELEVENTH EDITION. 	1
PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 	1
preferable ; and such was the pusillanimity of the no- 	1
P Reg. Maj. lib.ii. 58. 	1
prehended his mother to be in any danger. " The king said 	1
prehend, if he rejected Henry's offers of friendship, 	1
prejudice, but with desire. By the same means, a per- 	1
prejudices and passions of the two contending parties 	1
prejudices of the people are, in my opinion, respect- 	1
prejudices so natural to the human mind. How for- 	1
prejudices which occasioned her misfortunes, as a queen. 	1
premature trial; every step towards which seemed to 	1
preme authority, to be utterly destructive of good government. His princi- 	1
preme direction of all affairs, both civil and military, 	1
preparations with all possible expedition, and encou- 	1
prepared for it. Their army was almost double to that 	1
prepared the indictment ; and at a time when men were 	1
prepared the Scots to throw off the yoke, before they 	1
prerogative, and more subversive of the privileges of 	1
prerogative; conscious of their own strength, and of the 	1
prerogatives of the feudal monarchs. Like them, his claims and pretensions 	1
prerogative, which the crown had hitherto possessed, 	1
prerogative which the most absolute could never at- 	1
presbyteries, enact laws for the government of the 	1
presence ; and if that were denied, she instructed them 	1
presence ; but, as soon as she had cleared herself from 	1
presence of their sovereign was at present denied her ; 	1
presence she declared that the resignation of the crown, 	1
present, and I can now justify my undertaking the 	1
present, and, therefore, he is directed not to make any fortification at Leith, 	1
present at the baptism, he seems to have been excluded from^any share in 	1
present, but, we are told, that they never opened their 	1
presented to the 	1
presented with aggravation, and with their most threat- 	1
present necessity, would be negligently observed, and 	1
present situation of her affairs in England made it ne- 1666. 	1
present time be a proper one for settling the matter 	1
present to fortify the irresolute and passive spirit of the 	1
present, will not permit me to lose one post in returning you 	1
present with her, viz. her privy counsellors, and others, elected the lords of 	1
preservation of public order, and the security of private 	1
preserved in England, becomes more authentic : not 	1
preserved untouched and unexplained. She had pro- 	1
preserve him from rash and imprudent actions l . Fond 	1
preserve the tranquillity and happiness of her subjects. 	1
preserving the church from the dominion of a prince, 	1
president of parliament. 	1
pressed against the conduct of the conspirators, to- 	1
pressed at seeing her cause taken more immediately intentions, 	1
pressed in terms perfectly conformable to the system 	1
pressing the utmost sensibility of that contempt, with 	1
pression in the hands of a prince ! 	1
pression on her spirit. Her courtiers cultivated this 1566 - 	1
pressions. But, according to the usual fate of princes, 	1
pressions concerning those favours which the queen's 	1
pressions might be uttered, and violent and criminal 	1
pression upon a weak understanding only, or a disor- 	1
pression, which we are surprised to meet with in an age 	1
pretences, and amidst the license of civil wars, got into 	1
pretences offered in excuse for her conduct ; the real 	1
pretence that there he would have easier access to the 	1
pretended had been formed against his life. This he did accordingly ; but, 	1
pretended to be unanswerable. The letters and me- 	1
Pretensions Cardinal Beatoun, who had for many years been con- 	1
pretensions entitled him to great authority in the na- 	1
Pretensions Margaret of Norway, granddaughter of Alexander, 	1
pretensions of the crown of England to the sovereignty 	1
pretensions to it gave her great dignity and importance 	1
prevailed among the Scots. The conspirators against 	1
prevailed on all who were present to subscribe a paper 	1
prevailed on Lennox to purchase their friendship by 	1
prevail on the council of Constance to condemn this 	1
prevails on 	1
prevails on posal, concerning the crown matrimonial, met with 	1
prevent a party, which she dreaded, from ever recover- 	1
prevented from marrying, chiefly by the artifices of 	1
prevented her subjects from seeing the Scottish queen, 	1
prevented his assembling his friends and vassals, with- 	1
prevent his this intended flight of the king's, which would have 	1
preventing Mary from reascending the throne. The 	1
prevent the ruin of his estate and vassals. This was 	1
previously gave consent to the king's murder, or did 	1
Previous to doing this, I wished ta have the satisfaction of 	1
PREVIOUS TO THAT PERIOD; 	1
Prevot, who had just finished the translation of my history, 	1
price, as a work by which the booksellers might either 	1
prices of his love, or of his resentment, that impatient 	1
pride and ambition of ecclesiastics raised the indigna- 	1
pride. The Greeks were so in the ancient world ; and 	1
pride was insupportable to the nobles, as his cruelty 	1
prince, according to the ceremonies which the Romish 	1
prince, and bring both liberty and religion into dan- 	1
prince. At the same time, he felt, that the authority 	1
prince having routed the French at Guinegat and in- 	1
prince in Europe actually possessed, in one instance, a 	1
prince, or whose incapacity exposed him to the con- 	1
prince. own apartment ; and, as the queen distrusted every no- 	1
princes. 	1
princes. a nominal and precarious authority. Their impatience 	1
prince should catch the infection, if he staid in the palace, seems to favour 	1
princes of Lorrain amused their party in Scotland with 	1
princes of Lorrain resolved to select, for a sacrifice, 	1
princes ot 	1
prince's power, and the only genuine source of his hap- 	1
princes," says she, " ought not to be too carefully re- 	1
princes seem to have been the supreme judges of their 	1
princess so remarkable for her sagacity in penetrating 	1
princes. The implicit submission to all her decrees, 	1
prince submitted, with great impatience, to the restraint 	1
princes y . 	1
prince to land in Scotland. The Roman catholics, 	1
prince was obliged to connive at criminals whom he 	1
prince who wanted money, and who loved it; that the 	1
principal adherents, in a paper subscribed by them, September the twelfth, 	1
principal conspirator against the life of her husband 	1
principalities, almost independent, and held together 	1
principality may be considered as a fief, and all its great princes as vassals, 	1
principles, and disregarded their true interest. In the 	1
principles ; but, by one of those strange revolutions, 	1
principles in the constitution, nor precedents in the his- 	1
principles of sound philosophy, and of a just taste, were 	1
principles of the reformation from conviction, or so cun- 	1
principles she determined, in their present exigency, to 	1
PRINTED BY TALBOVS AND \VHEELEK, OXFORD. 	1
PRINTED FOR WILLIAM PICKERING, LONDON; AND 	1
printing has been completed a great while. You could have 	1
print! t at Edinburgh by Robert Lekprevik, printar to the king's majestic, 	1
prior and future alienations of crown lands were de- 	1
prior of St. Andrew's, who were appointed to meet 	1
prior to the arrival of the earl of Bedford in Scotland ; and when his in- 	1
prised of the event. You have, besides, thrown quite 	1
prise, James's next step was still bolder and more de- 	1
prise my friends, the Parisian philosophers, than this incident 	1
prising the enemy, or in striking the blow before his 	1
prisoner almost nineteen years. During that period, 	1
prisoner at Alnwick, Henry the second, as the price of 	1
prisoners. 	1
Prisoners taken 816 	1
prisonment of his associates; coldly received by his 	1
prisonment of the queen, and the dissolution of the 	1
prison were fresh in Mary's memory ; and if she should 	1
private character and habits, towards tracing the steps 	1
private house, and then sent to the tower. After 	1
private patrimony the comt6 of Paris; and all the jurisdiction which the 	1
private resentment to the intercession of her subjects 	1
private, was a project so chimerical as the most extra- 	1
prive the of the office of regent, which she had exercised so 	1
privilege. In 1633, when Charles the first was beginning to introduce 	1
privileges ; and even some title to arrogate new ones. 	1
privileges as subjects, and jealous of the encroachments 	1
privy council in which they were passed. From considering all these par- 	1
privy council, still remain k ; they are entitled, 'A short 	1
privy council the message from the Scottish queen, and 1 565. 	1
proach, in order to avert it, employed the earl of Glen- 	1
proach of the rebels, and some ships were already 	1
probability, to that embarrassment. From the time of 	1
probable, exhausted a great part of that fund which 	1
probably, in some measure, from the faction which 	1
probation to a confession of faith presented to them by 	1
proceeded further, whether the English commissioners 	1
proceeded so far, if I had not acted as I did. You will see 	1
proceeded to the utmost excesses*. 	1
proceeding, and jurisdiction, were in a martial age little 	1
proceedings against their sovereign; and it was the 	1
proceeding to any act of violence, listened with pleasure 	1
proceeding were more uniform, and their decisions more 	1
proceeding would, in all probability, have been employed 	1
proceed to the attainder of the rebel lords, and at the 	1
proclaimed the cardinal, who still continued to oppose 	1
proclaim, in the loudest manner, their apprehensions of 	1
proclamation issued May the twenty-third, 1567. Keith, 571. Mary's 	1
proclamation, openly took arms. Instead of yielding 	1
proclamation to raise her husband to be the master of 	1
procured, must have been deemed the concession of a 	1
produce against his sovereign, Murray empowered Le- 	1
produce any considerable effect, at this distance of 	1
produced greater effects 6 . 	1
produced, I enter into no discussion or controversy in 	1
produced in a treatise which he published at this time, 	1
produced, in their own favour, such evidence as they 	1
produced no other effects ; but they soon began to 	1
produced their hidden stores to support their friends ; 	1
produced to light, much still remained in darkness, 	1
producing fraudulent rentals ; by estimating the corn, 	1
professions of regard for their mistress, and consented 	1
professit within the realme," confirmed by the royal assent of the queen, 	1
professors of the religion aforesaid may assure themselves to be in full surety 	1
progress of a court of justice k . The prior executed 	1
Progress of From the death of cardinal Beatoun, nothing has 	1
progress of Norfolk's negotiations, the queen's partisans 	1
progress of the Roman arms, and rendered all the 	1
project of raising his family to the same pitch of power 	1
projects, with regard to Britain, they found it necessary 	1
prOlcSlaTllSt 	1
promised, it should be granted, notwithstanding all that had 	1
promised to revise them. 	1
promises gave her ground for entertaining hopes of 	1
promises of protection and indulgence pass upon them 	1
promises which she came under, to be distant and 	1
promises with which it was necessary to allure the re- 	1
PROM MR. HUME TO DR. ROBERTSON. 	1
promote it, improved with great dexterity every event 	1
promoting so desirable an event g . Norfolk heard him 	1
promoting the measures which were concerted for the 	1
prompted Bothwell, to whose influence over the queen 	1
prompt in repelling danger; all its motions are as sud- 	1
prone. Ancient papers, however, often contain no more than the slanders 	1
pronounced the moderation of the courtiers, apostacy ; 	1
pronounce him a powerful, nay, an absolute monarch. 	1
proof, and he would be fully convinced how false and 	1
proof. Melvil at that time enjoyed a considerable share 	1
proof of Bothwell's innocence, was esteemed an argu- 	1
proof of Murray's sincere attachment to the queen at 	1
proof of this is produced from a poem of Adrian Turnebus, by the publisher 	1
proof, or if he reckoned himself to be unjustly accused, 	1
proofs in support of his charge. But without getting 	1
proper bounds in the other nations of Europe, we may f^and 1 	1
proper instrument for recommending or executing the 	1
proper instruments for obtaining his consent. The 	1
properly be styled map-makers. For, after all, whence does 	1
properly the encampment of a great army; military 	1
proper method for bringing Mary's commissioners to 	1
proper number of cavalry was appointed to join it by 	1
proper of any in the kingdom for the station of a gar- 	1
proper to confirm an opposite account. If you still persist in 	1
proper to give the reader a sketch of the preferments 	1
proper to hold with regard to the exiled nobles. Many the exiled 	1
property fixed and permanent, many of their posses- 	1
Property has seldom undergone greater or more sudden 	1
property of an estate. This dispute became a deadly ~~ 	1
property of the nobles, another, which passed in a subse- 	1
property, were nearly the same in Scotland as in every 	1
propitious to her, rather than adverse ; and if her pros- 	1
proportion to the strength of her first affection, was 1566. 	1
proposal. Intent on defending themselves against Ca- 	1
proposal should be received in any other manner. After commend- 6 	1
proposed, and he had not dexterity enough to disguise 	1
proposed arguments of the discourse and the links of 	1
proposed for the more effectual payment of their sti- 	1
propositions, and the prospect of such vast power and 	1
proposition : " That there are some cases in which 	1
prosecuted with better success. 	1
prosecute the murderers without delay, was produced. 	1
prosecute the murderers with the utmost diligence, and 	1
prospect of advantage might allure her, she could ven- 	1
prospect of all those calamities which are occasioned by 	1
prospect of any national advantage, induced him to de- 	1
prospect of approaching death long before him; but 	1
prospect of a turbulent and disastrous reign. A war 	1
prospect of future fame. The satisfaction which she 	1
prospect of restoring the public exercise of her own 	1
prospect of safety appearing but in assistance from that 	1
prospect of success, and was unwilling to bind herself, 	1
prospect of this danger to themselves and to their cause, 	1
prospect of this long-expected succour. Their great 	1
prosperity. Flattered by the love of a queen, and the 	1
prosperity, thought proper to represent him. 	1
protected by the queen's favour, it was impossible to 	1
protection, and the nation, out of hatred to the English, 	1
protection of the emperor or king of Spain, would give 	1
protection. This disposition the queen encouraged to 	1
protestant, adhered to the queen regent, and acted with 	1
protestant clergy were suffered to languish. Penurious 	1
protestant clergy, would have been a fatal blow, both 	1
protestant doctrine, and, in his first parliament, con- 	1
protestant doctrine, it would be well if the whole fabric 	1
protestant doctrines ; and it is no small proof of the 	1
protestant doctrines, by taking a view of the political 	1
protestant faith in every part of the kingdom q . The 	1
protestant preachers ; but the popish ecclesiastics, ei- 	1
protestant queen of such eminent abilities. The same 	1
protestant religion, and suspected that he held, for 	1
protestant religion, thirty years had elapsed, and during 	1
protract business; unacquainted with the arts which 	1
protracted so long beyond the usual time of service in 	1
protract the whole cause by endless delays, and involve 	1
prove. 	1
prove a better apology, especially with a friend who has him- 	1
prove agreeable to the English nation, Elizabeth would 	1
proved ineffectual, or were intended to be so. But, 	1
proved of all his pretensions. Others were impatient 	1
proved to be ill-founded, he pronounces the elevation of women to the su- 	1
proved zeal, were chosen to be lords of the articles, 	1
prove formidable to the crown, she expressed great 	1
provement, and the latter susceptible of the best im- 	1
prove of the Qonsent of the French king and his mother. Having 	1
prove some protection to him. The conspirators had 	1
prove that he did not know the person, let him pay a great fine." Hickes, 	1
prove the assertion of your text. You add there, these let- 	1
provinces ; and, at that time, they quitted all their con- 	1
provinces engrossed, at that time, the riches and com- 	1
proving P or h^ was called into the privy council, to receive a final 	1
prudence. But Elizabeth, who did not expect that he 	1
prudently endeavour to conceal. Her attention to dress, 	1
prudent reserve, as to impose on Randolph, the Eng- 	1
prudent to quiet them : and that the same wisdom and 	1
P See Appendix, No. XVII. 'i Melv. 148. 	1
P See Appendix, No. XV. i Keith, Append. 126. 	1
P The most perfect idea of the feudal system of government may be 	1
public accusation. 	1
public affairs. The earl of Angus, who was one of that 	1
public ; and, after suffering so many atrocious deeds to 	1
public and private libraries, which will be freely opened for 	1
publication will support, and, if possible, extend the 	1
public business admirable natural talents, improved by 	1
public choice conferred this honourable character, were 	1
public disorders. Perhaps, by gentle treatment, and 	1
public, Dr. Birch, whose obliging disposition is well 	1
publicly acknowledged, she was ready to yield to the 	1
publicly and universally standing, on which account she was most worthy 	1
publicly condemned by persons of most power and cre- 	1
public must judge between us. Only allow me to say, that 	1
public pomp and pleasure, which seemed to be the sole 	1
public proclamation, to appear before it*. 	1
public spirit nor resolution to take it. 	1
public transactions were entirely conducted by Bothwell, an act was passed 	1
public with the utmost virulence of language. 	1
public writs issued in her name 1 . But, though the 	1
published an account of their proceedings in the news- 	1
published, Appendix, No. XVIII. proves the same thing. 3. Le Croc, the 	1
published, Append. No. XV. But in opposition to these suspicions, and 	1
published a sort of manifesto, in which she laboured to 	1
published since Christmas here, had appeared before your 	1
puerile : " Fraterculus quidam, nomine Black, papistarum antesignanus, 	1
pular, and, for that reason^ successful. By devices of a 	1
pular and martial families of Percy and of Nevil. 	1
pular and splendid virtues, it occasioned a dangerous 	1
pulling down with their own hands that fabric of eccle- 	1
pulpit, and, by a vehement harangue against idolatry, 	1
pulsion of the French troops out of Scotland. It was 	1
punctuality. I beg you may forgive this trouble. I am, with 	1
punishing almost assured them of impunity. 	1
punishment merited by his crimes, permitted openly, 	1
punish these outrages, was an action equally popular in 	1
punita ; et justitia relegata extra terminos regni exulavit." Chartular. 	1
punity. The administration of justice was extremely 	1
purchased it by giving them to understand that we were content therewith." 	1
purely aristocratical. With all the ensigns of royalty, 	1
purity of religion ; they gave rise also, among the Scot- 	1
purpose. But his account of this whole transaction appears to be so void 	1
purpose of rebellion. 	1
purpose to expose the absurd tenets and practices of 	1
purpose was signed, and intrusted to the keeping of 	1
pursued or interrupted. After halting three hours, 	1
pursue her dangerous designs, and to act without fear 	1
pursue his studies. It appears, from his letters to lord 	1
pursuit. His sons, sir John and Adam, were taken, 	1
pursuits of justice. To apprehend, and to punish a cri- 	1
put a stop to the career of their insolent subjects, and ~ 	1
puted the grievances of which they had reason to com- 	1
puted to manifest errours in conduct. The success of 	1
putes between contending nations, was employed to 	1
puties on both sides, the dignity of the judges before 	1
put to this languid and inactive war, by a peace, in 	1
put upon her a most mortifying indignity, by stopping 	1
Q2 	1
q Spotsw. 232. ' Haynes, 505. Murdin, 44. 62, etc. 	1
quaintance with lord Harrington, and cannot venture to ask 	1
quainted with his private life, seems to disdain that 	1
quainted with the circumstances of the life of those 	1
quainted with the method of attacking any place for- 	1
qualities which threw such lustre on her reign, we may 	1
quality more valuable, is apt to inspire. Intoxicated 	1
quality were both unknown, and he was treated at first 	1
quarrel, in opposition to the king. Hence the many 	1
quarrels between the two kingdoms; while the Scots 	1
quarrel. They happened unfortunately to meet in the 	1
quarter, and knowing well how imperfectly transactions 	1
quarter. But Henry the second being then at peace 	1
queen. 	3
queen. . . 	1
queen altogether culpable ; and, perhaps, impatience 	1
queen and 1 he necessity of repairing in person to Y ork added 	1
queen, and all the other proceedings of the confede- 	1
queen, and five by tb^e parliament ; that hereafter the 	1
queen, and found surety to obey her commands. Keith, 226. Had the 	1
queen, and gained them an ascendant over all her coun- 	1
queen and her favourite. And the ardour of their zeal, 	1
queen and her ministers, seems to be no less improbable. 1. On the 	1
queen, and notwithstanding the exorbitant privileges of 	1
queen, and ready to sooth all her passions, instantly de- 	1
queen appeared in public; were manifest symptoms of 	1
queen. As the adherents of the congregation greatly 	1
queen, by these liberal concessions, in behalf of their 	1
queen could not help distrusting men who had been 	1
queen could not induce them, either by her entreaties 	1
queen courted by so many princes . 	1
queen dowager, took a considerable share in the direc- 	1
queen dreaded their approach with a train so nume- 	1
queen. England remained her only asylum; and in 	1
queen, first at Aberdeen, and then at Rothemay, whither he would not 	1
queen had conferred upon him ; and the act to that ef- 	1
queen had restored, by a special commission granted 	1
queen herself was accessory to the crime *. This bold 	1
queen herself were no stranger to the crime. Of Both- ~~ 	1
queen, in a country where no name greater than the 	1
queen, in breach of the concert into which he had en- 	1
queen in their favour d . 	1
queen might have towards those who professed the 	1
queen not unwilling to venture upon this rash action. 	1
queen of Scotland, from the place due to them in the 	1
queen of Scotland, studied to deprive Elizabeth of her 	1
queen of Scots in one or two points, than you seem at present 	1
queen of Scots. To reinstate her in her throne, was 	1
queen on her marriage, and invested the king with the 	1
queen on one hand, and with the sentiments of his 	1
queen, on their approach, abandoned with precipita- 	1
queen or their country, tamely allowed an inconsider- 	1
queen possessed so entirely the confidence of her sub- 	1
queen prudently abandoned a scheme, which she found 	1
queen regent brought about by a stratagem. Notwith- 	1
queen resided at Dunbar, detained as a prisoner, but 	1
queen s 	1
queen's affairs during this year, began to work some 	1
queens, and these were the difficulties which retarded 	1
queen's army consisted chiefly of a multitude, hastily 	1
queen's army was already strong, and only eight miles 	1
queen's arrival in the north, he laboured, in good earnest, to gain her fa- 	1
queen's authority. It was under precedents drawn 	1
queen's bedchamber. Though Mary was now in the 	1
queen's commissioners were dismissed much in the 	1
queen's favour made no impression on such a temper. 	1
queen's firmness, the princes of Lorrain did not trust 	1
queen should die before him without issue, and to de- 	1
queen's inflexible resolution to suppress their religion h . 	1
queen's letters to Bothwell.' The facts and observa- 	1
queen's mercy, they endeavoured, by facing the ene- 	1
queen's m Scotland during three months; a king murdered 	1
queen's partiality towards her adversaries. In the first Ny. 22. 	1
queen's person in an expedition against thieves. As soon as the queen 	1
queen's person should be immediately committed to his 	1
queen's person was in his hands ; she was surrounded 	1
queen's pretensions. 	1
queen's pretensions to the regency had been principally 	1
queen's sincerity, and sensible that concessions, flowing 	1
queen, than his submitting to implore the aid of the 	1
queen. The duke of Chatelherault regarded the prior 	1
queen, though her right of succession was generally 	1
queen to assent to this law, Bothwell seems to have 	1
queen to have offered an insult both to their under- 	1
queen to liberty having been discovered, and disap- 	1
queen to St. Andrew's, and Darnly to Castle Campbell. The lords, in their 	1
queen, triumphed over the prudent, but envious, re- 	1
queen. Was it ever known that a prince was blamed 	1
queen was not accompanied with a body of troops capable of attempting 	1
queen was now returned, filled her small court with 	1
queen was, therefore, obliged to prevent the just re- 	1
queen was weak, irresolute, and disunited ; and no tion. 	1
queen was well known, nor could it be expected that 	1
queen, were present. But they had made their peace 	1
queen, who considered him as the chief author of all 	1
queen, who had apartments in the palace, were alarmed 	1
queen withheld from him the title of king, he possess- 	1
queen, would have been equally injurious to individuals 	1
quences could follow, or that any dangerous pretensions 	1
quences of suffering the French to establish themselves 	1
quences which might follow upon a breach with Eng- 	1
quence, the rant of passion takes the place of calm 	1
quently the best way will be for your bookseller, as soon as 	1
quent parliament, aimed a dreadful blow at their power. 	1
quered lands were allotted to him ; the remainder, under 	1
quest; but, as she could not believe so many profes- 	1
question, and on his own conduct hi the late transac- 	1
question, and subjected to a foreign jurisdiction, was 	1
question the reasonableness of the one, or the truth of 	1
question which she artfully started, concerning the per- 	1
question with regard to the right of succession would 	1
question with the utmost solemnity, he summoned all 	1
quests in Britain. 	1
quests of such supplicants. As her ministers, though 	1
quickly fade, his mind rather resembled the slow-grow- 	1
quieted by many fears. In his latter years, he suffered 	1
quillity. But time and accidents ripened the feudal 	1
quillity had proceeded from that sect 8 ; and, though 	1
quillity, they are altogether silent. 	1
quired, and promised to send commissioners to the 	1
quired him a great increase of reputation and popu- 	1
quired over Mary's mind appeared in the clearest man- Remark _ 	1
quired strength, and advanced, by large and firm steps, 	1
quires from all its individual members, and from all its 	1
quire the cancelling a great many sheets ; that there were 	1
quire the regent such considerable influence in this 	1
quiry, however, was made, and some persons called 	1
quiry which proved fatal to the popish system. As this 	1
quished, were not subdued. The ardent zeal with 	1
quishing all thoughts of such a bill : that the procuring 	1
quisite for soothing the rage or removing the jealousies 	1
quisition of great value. The framers of the law seem manifestly to have 	1
quite different and very criminal nature might be con- 	1
quitted by a sentence which served only to confirm the 	1
ra A st t l! e these sentiments to his father, the duke of Chatelher- 	1
ra Camd. 389. " Ibid. 396. 	1
r Act 9. Parl. 1424. Act 30. ibid. 	1
racteristic virtues of all the different races of princes 	1
racter of reformers, and concluded the knowledge of 	1
racter, of the slightest appearance of injury; accus- 	1
racters of the men, and the violent spirit of the age, 	1
racy against which followed it, it appears extremely memorable ; and 	1
racy as at present. Time, and the decision of almost 	1
rage and steadiness in action. The rage of religious 	1
rage began to abate". At the same time Elizabeth 	1
raged monarch, drawing his dagger, ' this shall ;' and 	1
raged them to oppose it. They began with forming 	1
raged the queen, their sister, to expect, in a short time, 	1
rage. Her designs upon the supreme power were con- 	1
rage, in defence of then' countrymen. The provost of 	1
ragement to take arms. No sooner did they make this 	1
rageous. In his letter from Edinburgh, September 1, 1543, he says : " The 	1
rage, which rendered the ambition of his brother so 	1
raging the protestant religion, and the providing for 	1
rain, who, at that tune, had the entire direction of 	1
raised him to the highest honours, she bestowed on 	1
raised without their assistance. To call nobles, in- 	1
rallied, returned to the charge; the foot pursued the 	1
rally to be expected from the author of the History of 	1
rance. The catholics of Scotland seeing that the pro- 	1
ra * n d etermme d to make their attack 6 ; and, by using 	1
Randolph, in their accounts of the conspiracy against Murray, differ widely 	1
rangue in my praise. What happened last week, when I had 	1
ranked among the constituent members of that assembly. 	1
ranked in the triumvirate of British historians of the pre- 	1
rank ; no uniform or consistent rule seems to have been 	1
ranks, drew their swords, and rushed forward to the 	1
rank, shoulder and shoulder together, with their pikes in both their hands 	1
rank, such potent and haughty barons were the rivals, 	1
ransom, and a promise to surrender the places of 	1
rant of those violent counsels, which prevailed in the 	1
rapid than singular. ,In the short space of eleven days 	1
rapine completed the devastation of every thing venera- 	1
rary eminence, among whom were Gibbon and Burke ; 	1
rash and premature attempts against the privileges of 	1
rash expression, was nothing in comparison of that with 1559. 	1
rashly in order to quell them, fell victims to their rage. 	1
rate as to exhibit one against her 6 . These suspicions 	1
rated from the rest of mankind by the law of celibacy, 	1
rate enemies, and sacrificed its honour to his own am- 	1
rately, both in quarto and octavo. 	1
rates, he lurked for some time among his vassals in the 	1
rates. In his instructions there appears a remarkable 	1
rate spirit, to be agreeable to the temper or wishes of 	1
rates, were pronounced lawful. The letters which 	1
rate what course they should hold in such a difficult 	1
rather than a king, his military command was extensive, 	1
Rather than give away, with my own hands, the crown 	1
rather than the subjects, of their prince. They often 	1
rather than to his affection. He had warmly remon- 	1
rather to purchase Henry's friendship with disadvan- 	1
ratification of the treaty. 	1
ratifications of the grants made in their favour ; and as 	1
ratified by the king and queen ; that the king and queen 	1
ratifying the acts of parliament, one thousand five hun- 	1
ratiocination, requires a strength of memory and a pre- 	1
rational theory of what may be expected from them in 	1
ray, on his part, despairing of preventing the marriage 	1
razed, and no new fort be erected, without the permis- 	1
reached Stirling it dwindled to an inconsiderable num- 	1
read it with great pleasure. I asked her, whether she was 	1
read the book of human nature instead of the journals 	1
read the scriptures in a language which they under- 	1
ready, of my own accord, and out of friendship to you, 	1
ready, on all occasions, to discover an extraordinary 	1
ready to take the field in defence of them, every errour 	1
real advantage to Scotland, and exposed it to the dan- 	1
real authority. Upon his retreat, Douglas, earl of An- 	1
real cause to be alarmed at the intrusion of a formidable 	1
Reasonable as this proposal might appear to Mary, 	1
reasonable. But this moderation being imputed to fear, 	1
reason. He became pensive, sullen, and retired. He 	1
reason, in a meeting of privy council held on the twentyr 	1
Reasonings During this rapid progress of the confederates, the 	1
reason, in the very infancy of the social state, the 	1
reasons for entertaining a less favourable opinion of Mary 	1
reason, she resolved to leave all the affairs of Scot- 	1
reasons pleaded for a retreat. But, on the other hand, 	1
reasons, they confounded her adversaries, and silenced 	1
reasons were not wanting to dissuade Henry from com- 	1
reasons which have been already explained, rendered 	1
reason to apprehend. Her rebellious subjects were 	1
reason to be satisfied with a device which, at so small 	1
rebellion against the government, and a conspiracy 	1
rebels then were. During their retreat, they had sent 	1
rebuild the one, or to reassemble the other. 	1
recalled into Scotland, it seems to have been consider- 	1
received by his countrymen with applause ; and, as no 	1
received by the public ; and Dr. Blair, who is a master in 	1
received from them 1 . A dreadful instrument of op- 	1
received the addresses and complaints of the general 	1
received the feudal casualties of the ward, marriage, 	1
received the least part of what was due for the preced- 	1
received. These were deemed by many essential to the 	1
received to one of the churches of that city. In 1 759, 	1
receive not the royal assent, nor perhaps pass the houses. I 	1
receiving intelligence of Murray's enterprise, retired 	1
recent injuries rendered the papists desperate; both 	1
reception, as did not encourage him to make any long 	1
reception as was due to a queen, a kinswoman, and an 	1
reckoning, were represented in the strongest colours. 	1
reckon upon obtaining whatever decision was most fa- 	1
recommended by Maitland alone, would undoubtedly 	1
recommended to young men, and to it we are told that 	1
reconcilement ; and soon reestablished the appearance, 	1
reconcilement appear. On the contrary, she mentions, Jan . M 	1
reconcilement, but an unfortunate one to both these 	1
reconciliation of that kingdom to the Romish see. Thus 	1
records, positively to determine. Among men inflamed 	1
recourse could be had to more ancient records, it sup- 	1
recourse suddenly ; and subjects seldom venture upon 	1
recourse to an article in their instructions, which they 	1
recourse to every artifice and insinuation, in order to 	1
recourse to every thing by which she could hope either 	1
Recourse was, therefore, had to arms. The queen had 	1
recovered from the confusion occasioned by this unfore- 1562. 	1
recovered from the shock of the regent's attack on her 	1
recovered her liberty, her sentiments in his favour 	1
recovered of that distemper, which the ignorance of the 	1
recovered possession of an important territory which 	1
recovering it. The reformers had, hitherto, been ob- 	1
recover possession of the church revenues, which they 	1
recover their declining reputation, or to confirm the 	1
recover what this man's madness had thrown away? The 	1
recting the other. Your strictures on me will not be made 	1
rectness, whatever the English may imagine. Were 	1
redress, at least some mitigation, of their grievances. 	1
reduced me to great perplexity. You told me, that all his- 	1
reducing the power of the aristocracy, sometimes avow- 	1
reestablishment of the Romish religion in Scotland k . 	1
refinement, Elizabeth opposed to them ambassadors of 	1
reformation ; by which may be estimated the degree of 	1
reformation. Irregular and violent as its sallies were, 	1
reformation took place, the episcopal form of govern- 	1
reformed church. Bothwell accordingly commenced a April 27. 	1
reformed doctrine. She had abated nothing of her 	1
reformers. merous an( l spreading body of the regent's enemies, 	1
reformers were persecuted with all the cruelty which 	1
Reform, iii. Append. 360. 	1
refuse"*) 18 anc ^ indignation at the regent's presumption, in loading 	1
refused compliance. He said that your book was now finished, 	1
refused to allow her own physician to attend him. Buch. 349. Knox, 401. 	1
refused to concur with them in their enterprise ; others 	1
refused to surrender Leith, and to depart out of the 	1
refused to surrender the castles in his custody to the 	1
refuse it. 	1
refuse their consent, another convention was appointed 	1
refusing to vindicate herself from an accusation which 	1
regain the good opinion of such a powerful protectress, 	1
regain their credit with the victorious party, fell upon 	1
regal authority was then sunk ; and the impunity with 	1
regarded her life^ as the great security of the national 	1
regarded more than ever the restraints of order and 	1
regarded, no man could venture with safety to oppose 	1
regarded the English as usurpers who aimed at en- 	1
regard her merely as a woman. 	1
regardless of the indigence and demands of their bre- 	1
regardless of the reputation of their queen and the 	1
regard to both ; though the zeal and credulity of party-writers have added 	1
regard to Scotland, by the maxims of their late master, 	1
regard to the conduct and character of queen Mary to 	1
regard to this part of her conduct; and although 	1
regent 05 ' " w ^ were assembled for that purpose, unanimously con- 	1
regent, after his victory, had marched to Edinburgh, 	1
regent and parliament of Scotland, who, at the time 	1
regent, and represented their sense of the intended 	1
regent consented to this measure. His authority was 	1
regent, got him out of the hands of the person to 	1
regent, he, in all probability, would have rejected it 	1
regent, in promoting a measure so acceptable to France, 	1
regent left London, she supplied him with a consider- 	1
regent", obliged him, at last, to resign that high office, Prevails on 	1
regent, or to obtain it by his consent. Under a mino- 	1
regent's authority, and of the queen's resignation ; the 	1
regent secretly enjoyed an event, which removed out of 	1
regent's party, was either the condition on which they 	1
regent. This hesitation cannot be ascribed to the scru- 	1
regent to 	1
regent to call a meeting of parliament. Nothing was 	1
regent to hasten that, by procuring a sentence of di- 	1
regent, which he could not fix to his own satisfaction. 	1
regret the new channel in which court favour was likely 	1
regret the overthrow of so many stately fabrics, the 	1
regular form of government instituted ; the authority of 	1
regular, the leaders of the congregation had no reason 	1
regulations, endeavoured to extend the authority of his 	1
reign ; and, for that reason, had advised Henry to be- 	1
reigners ; and publishing the ignominy, and exposing 	1
reigners at least, would escape without censure, or be 	1
reigning princes, exposed to continual invasions of the 	1
reign of Charles the first, was then converted into a standing law. " For 	1
reign p , came more and more to be considered as the 	1
reigns. Those princes, whose intrigues or valour opened 	1
reign to domestic objects ; and, instead of forming vast 	1
reign, with the advice of the whole estates in parliament," etc. Then follow 	1
rejected; and long delays must necessarily have inter- 	1
rejected, in such a manner as gave rise to no slight sus- conduct. 	1
rejected. sne should either be restored to the full possession of 	1
rejected with contempt; and the popish clergy, far from 	1
rejected with that scorn which might well have been 	1
relating to the affairs of Scotland, but copies of others 	1
relations of every chieftain assumed the same name and 	1
relations, rather than the crown, or the protestant 	1
relative ought very seldom to be omitted, and is here 	1
relative to the manner of committing that barbarous 	1
released upon his humble submission to Elizabeth, giv- 	1
relief ; no person, in whom she could confide, was 	1
relief. Thither they marched, and having without ef- 	1
relieving the nobles from the expense and danger of~ 	1
religion, and to ruin those who professed it. At the 	1
religion, are ingenious, solid, and deep. Your work will cer- 	1
religion, as the price of their compliance with his will. 	1
religion could supply, was placed around their power, 	1
religion, entered within the gates of the chapel u . The 	1
religion. For this purpose, he insisted that she should 	1
religion. History relates these extravagancies of the 	1
religion, hoped to sooth the protestants, and expected, 	1
religion. Mem. 446. 	1
religion. Near an hundred years after this period, 	1
religion. The one laboured to pull down his own work, 	1
religion, the pleasure of complying with her uncles, and 	1
religion. The spirit of controversy was then new and 	1
religion ; they proposed to reestablish the queen in the 	1
religion, to be either neutrals, or favourers of popery k . 	1
religion, to encourage learning, and to support the poor. 	1
religion, under the tyranny of an excommunicated here- 	1
religion, without bigotry ; a lover of justice, without 	1
Religious considerations alone were sufficient to have 	1
religious freedom in the nation. His resentment led 	1
religious liberty, and averse from the dominion of stran- 	1
religious liberty, the protestants laboured to render 	1
religious opinions of his new confidents. 	1
religious zeal. Montmorency, in order to convince 	1
Relying on the king's promises, who had now attained 	1
remainder of her days, either in England or in France. 	1
remainder of his life to the quiet pursuits of study, and 	1
remained but one step to take, they wanted neither 	1
remained but to meet the enemy, while yet at a dis- 	1
remain in dutiful subjection to her government ; abstain 	1
remarkable instance. On the Sunday after her arrival, 	1
remarkably incompatible with the manners of every 	1
remonstrances made no impression on her brothers; 	1
remonstrances of the assembly of the church, which 	1
remonstrances of the cardinal were not without effect. 	1
remonstrances of the Scottish queen, to go on with 	1
removed, with his family, from Gladsmuir to Edin- 	1
remove the conference to Westminster, and to appoint 	1
Renault's Abrege chronol. p. 81. Among the Anglo-Saxons, we find a 	1
rence of Bothwell, as to her eagerness to conclude a 1569. 	1
rence of the incumbents, daily extended their encroach- 	1
rency had, for some time, checked their career, yet, 	1
rendered him universally odious. William, the eighth 	1
rendered incapable of any inheritance either public or 	1
rendered the period you treat of as interesting as any part of 	1
render it impossible to give any authentic account of the 	1
render the castle, and to set his son at liberty. 	1
render the imputation of such a crime less improbable. 	1
renewed her demand, of being admitted into the queen's 	1
renewed their mistress's request of a personal interview, 	1
renounced his allegiance, and aspired to independence. 	1
renounce ^ er ^ e secretly withdrew from Edinburgh, met with 	1
renounce the dignity and power which she was born to 	1
renounce the usurped dominion of the pope, which was 	1
repair the injuries her reputation had suffered by that 	1
repeated advices given him by Courcelles and the French 	1
repeated and enforced the same arguments which he 	1
repeated applications, to ratify it r . Mary, under vari-~ 	1
repeated instances of Elizabeth's artifice and deceit, 	1
replacing Mary on her throne, under a few limitations, 	1
representations of the queen. What often happens to 	1
represented Rizio's credit with the queen to be the 	1
represented, seeing the alarm spread rapidly in every 	1
represented with perspicuity and force ; and the conse- 	1
reputation, and force her to confirm her resignation of 	1
reputation, as much as upon numbers ; reputation is 	1
required her, as she regarded her own honour, to give 	1
required the application of a delicate hand. After 	1
requires the t o her rival, than Elizabeth required the regent to 	1
requiring her subjects to take arms, and to attend her 	1
requited it with ingratitude, and treated her with neg- 	1
resembled that of a baron, rather than that of a sove- 	1
resembled those slow poisons, which waste the consti- 	1
Resentment and disappointed ambition urged him to 	1
resentment and indignation against the French hurried 	1
resentment of the nobles broke out with such violence, 	1
reserve, and many distinctions. In a fierce age he was 	1
reserve ; and the aid which she expected from the 	1
reserve with respect to the queen's actions, as renders 	1
resided for some years in France, and was nojw sent 	1
residence, in a delightful situation, with a dear and excel- 	1
resignation extorted by fear, and granted during her 	1
resign the ' J 	1
resistance, so just in its own nature, but so delicate in 	1
resistance, which is their last remedy, but in cases of 	1
resolute and dismayed; and the queen's partisans in 	1
resolutely, but slowly, and with the caution which was 	1
resolution, equally wild and desperate, of embarking on 	1
resolution of living unmarried, and she discovered no 	1
resolution of proceeding to the utmost extremities, in 	1
resolutions, joined to the deliberation with which she their assist - 	1
resolved, at first, to proceed against them with the ut- 	1
resolved, therefore, to give up Mary into the hands of 	1
resolved to give no definitive sentence in the cause. 	1
resolved to gratify her own inclination, and to ask no 	1
resolved upon a war with Philip the second, and fore- 	1
resolves an( j accustomed to command, could not bear the con- 	1
Resolve to It was on that side, therefore, that the princes of Lor- 	1
resort, all the causes brought under its review, and has 	1
resort towards Edinburgh to resist your majesty's army. And for the exe- 	1
respectably settled in the world. 	1
respect, and admitted them to no inconsiderable share 	1
respect and confidence. At last she desired him to 	1
respect; and Morton, in their name, made ample pro- 	1
respect and popularity which that party had now attained 	1
respectful, some symptoms of his distrusting the queen 	1
respect of his opponents, and the esteem of all. 	1
respect to both. From all corners of the kingdom men 	1
respect to numbers or to power, to settle the govern- 	1
respect to this, I applied to his majesty's advocate and 	1
respect, were the only returns he had hitherto received 	1
restless ambition of the Austrian princes, the avowed 	1
rest of the country. But while he was laying hold upon Oct. 16. 	1
restoration to the throne, with an increase of authority, 	1
restore a daring man, exasperated by recent injuries, to 	1
restored union and tranquillity to that kingdom*. To- 	1
restraining, they really strengthened the* principle of 	1
Restrains To restore the regular administration X)f justice, and 	1
rest satisfied with the enjoyment of this precarious 	1
rest stood wavering and irresolute, and some began 	1
result of it, was in Elizabeth's own power, she would 	1
resumed their ancient place in that assembly. Ibid. 3. She had joined the 	1
retire 6 into ^ ia&lt; ^ * a ken, Mary employed that interval in providing for 	1
retired ; and, having received no effectual aid from 1565. 	1
retired first to Howard house, and then, in contempt 	1
retired with the utmost shame and disgust ; having dis- 	1
retire towards the main body. But his friends, unhap- 	1
retreating, and fixed his head-quarters at Glasgow. 	1
retrieve his affairs ended yet more unfortunately. One 	1
returned into Scotland, this accident was universally 	1
returned without success. Troops were assembled in 	1
return from Perth, appears with still greater certainty ; 1. From the express 	1
return it as soon as you can, that I may communicate it, and 	1
return the book much sooner than I could have wished, 	1
return. Their determination, it is easy to conceive, 	1
return, without reaping the fruits of his victory. At 	1
return you thanks for the communication of your notes on the 	1
revenge, as justifiable on that account ; and so many 	1
revenge. The earliest and most simple punishment 	1
revenge was disappointed, their courage became sus- 	1
revenues of the former bishops. 	1
revenues of the fraternity; and, except what he allowed 	1
revenue suffered no small diminution, by the loss of 	1
revenues wasted or alienated, the crown lands seized or 	1
revered so highly for their sacred character, but more 	1
reverence. A state of pure anarchy had prevailed for 	1
reverence of the people, was superior even to that which 	1
review of the whole work, and to avail myself both of the re- 	1
Review of time. If we take a view of what happened to each of 	1
revolutions, than those to which it was subject at that 	1
revolutions which happened there, they cannot form a 	1
rewarded services which he had the inclination, but 	1
reward of eighteen hundred crowns, a great sum in that age. De Vita sua, 	1
reward of their martial exploits. Conquerors, whom 	1
Rheims, and there, in solitude, indulged her grief, or 	1
ria e - as others were startled at the same dangers which had 	1
riage ; and declared, that she would forego every conir 	1
riage and ratifying these articles, they engaged that 	1
riage having been previously obtained" 1 . She issued 	1
riage. intentions of the English queen in a clear light, and to 	1
riage of the queen. Among the persons on whom the 	1
riage of the Scottish queen interested Elizabeth more 	1
riage. She required Lennox and Darnly, whom she 	1
riage, suffered no interruption from this application of 	1
riage, to dread an union with any great prince, whose 	1
riage with all his interest. Melv. 111. During some months after the 	1
riage with Bothwell; after providing for the safety of 	1
rians of London ; and have ever desired to remain in the 	1
riches can give, or fancy desire. With regard to my future 	1
richest and most valuable possessions. Even that third 	1
riches upon those who called themselves his servants. 	1
rich on the inheritance of the church, they were equally 	1
ried ; and a third, in order to ransom him, if he should 	1
ried the authority of commands. On this occasion, the 	1
rience, assumed the chief direction of French affairs. 	1
ries did not render the master of his own army, pos- 	1
ries. Maitland, as the most able negotiator of the 	1
ries of our laws begins. During the reign &amp;l the Jameses, 	1
ries, were astonished, when the French invaded their 	1
right, but as a gift, flowing from their good will h . All 	1
right, instantly assumed the title of regent. He hoped, 	1
right is an idea so obvious and so popular, that a nation 	1
right of jurisdiction, but those who depended on him 	1
right of jurisdiction to be unalienable for the future. 	1
right of succession to the English crown. In this re- 	1
right of succession was undoubted, she hoped it would 	1
rights. 	1
rights of all its princes. Our observations with regard to the limited juris- 	1
rights of hospitality, without regarding his tender age, 	1
rights. The punishments for crimes became more se- 	1
right to choose a husband without consent of parlia- 	1
right to defend itself, not only from present dangers, 	1
right to the crown, which often betrayed her into mean ~ 	1
rigour. 	1
rigour. joined, on this occasion, several noblemen of the greatest 	1
rigour of her proceedings. Many among the most emi- 	1
rigour of the season, having obliged the English army, 	1
rigour. One circumstance, however, and that too the 	1
ring the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, is almost 	1
riod. 	1
riod of which I write the history. With what success 	1
rior ' f any part of its proceedings may be brought by 	1
riorities' and jurisdictions extended over many of the 	1
riosity and impatience ; and though I was obliged to 	1
riosity and importance, leave succeeding ages altogether 	1
riosity of writers of different parties. The attention 	1
rious mien and voice commanded Rizio to leave a place 	1
ripen, much less to sour. However that may be, I hope to 	1
ripens slowly, and lies long concealed ; but it grew up, 	1
rise to the blackest suspicions. All his address, as 	1
rise to this barbarous practice, were removed; after 	1
rished. Princes, of greater abilities, were content to 	1
rishioners. We are told that he was distinguished by 	1
rising in her bosom, it is no easy matter to determine. 	1
rism of Persia and of Abyssinia; the erratick manners 	1
rison, seems to have allured the queen to this unjustifi- 	1
ritated, but did not weaken them; and their discon- 	1
rite 1 '. The offices which Bothwell already possessed, 	1
rited by the loss of the earl of Huntly, could give no 	1
rited it, but to the insinuations of Rizio. Mary's own 	1
rites, combined against him. His ambitious spirit could 	1
rites of the reformed church ; made choice of a pro- 	1
rites of the Romish church. But neither Bedford nor 	1
rites of the Romish church, was prohibited. The man- 	1
rit of the feudal constitution. The king, who, at a dis- General 	1
ritories no less ample. France and England, countries 	1
ritories which had been acquired, or preserved, by the 	1
ritual prescribes, hoping that her subjects would be 	1
rity, and among a warlike and factious people, the for- 	1
rity, and protected her person, who entered into all her 	1
rity annexed to the person of a supreme judge, but his 	1
rity, by marching to Stirling, at the head of his follow- 	1
rity of the greater nobles, who had drawn the whole 	1
rity to a state of imbecility, from which succeeding mo- 	1
rity, which was destitute of real strength, they endea- 	1
rity ; who, on the other hand, engaged to take no step 	1
rivalled and overawed the crown, and the terrour with 	1
rivalled, at open defiance : and, as she was afraid that ~~ 	1
rivals. Among the former, every lover of his country 	1
rivals. The archduke had little to recommend him 	1
rival to ascend the throne after her decease. But nei- 	1
rival who now triumphed in his ruin. From that time 	1
rival, whose birth, in the opinion of all good catholics, 	1
rived from the antiquity and power of their families '. 	1
rives in 	1
riwup St P r i soner as tne queen of Scots. During the former 	1
rized that capricious monarch to settle the order of suc- 	1
Rizio, arrived at Edinburgh next evening. Murray 	1
Rizio hated At the same time another design, which took its rise 	1
Rizio instantly apprehended that he was the victim at 	1
Rizio'sfa- have remained unknown to posterity. But what for- 	1
Rizio to lord Ruthven, and implored his assistance, him. 	1
Rizio, who, after he had engaged to aid Murray with 	1
Rizio, whom the king had at first taken into great Suspects 	1
r J aspires to 	1
r Keith, 350. Melv. 132. Keith, Append. 169. 	1
r Keith, 81. 	1
r Keith, Append. 20. 	1
r Melv. 130. Keith, Append. 130, 334. 	1
rmmblVthe fif teent h century, and beginning of the sixteenth, all 	1
road of the Scots. For this end, he made great ad- 	1
Robert Bruce. Their valour conquered the kingdom, 	1
Robert Melvil confirmed her declaration ; and on that, 	1
Robert No prince was ever more indebted to his nobles than 	1
Robertson did not confine himself entirely to the 	1
Robertson had even begun, at a very early period, a 	1
Robertson into this society to a motive not less power- 	1
Robertson received the first rudiments of education 	1
Robertson sat as a member, he addressed the repre- 	1
Robertson took instantly a respectable rank among the 	1
Robertson was a member of the select society, a 	1
Robert the third to James the sixth, not one died a na- 	1
rolls of parliament, and from the manner of choosing 	1
Roman catholics ardently wished for her succession. 	1
Rome, he was a zealous defender of that superstition, 	1
Romish church. This, added to the indifference, and 	1
Romish ritual. 	1
Romish superstition, this, in its utmost violence, they 	1
rons, and a few commissioners of boroughs, who met 	1
rons. But in extraordinary conjunctures, when the 	1
rons, or to attempt wresting from them any of their 	1
rood-house ; and, in order to encourage him to do so, a safe-conduct was 	1
roof, by that fortunate expression of her resentment 	1
roonstrate g re g at i n beheld this bold and decisive step taken by 	1
rope. They used that style and appellation in public 	1
ror or omission in my book had occurred to you in the perusal 	1
rose, which soon attained the highest rank in the king- 	1
rosity, her infatuation was invincible, and she resolved 	1
Ross and Herries, before they were introduced to Eli- 	1
rounded by a second party of French, who advanced in 	1
rour, as saved Fife from the effects of their vengeance. 	1
rours. But, animated with a more noble and disinter- 	1
rours of popery with such fervent zeal as could not fail 	1
rour. The earl's vassals ran to arms with the utmost 	1
roused and irritated by the most cruel excesses of eccle- 	1
roused this spirit. The points in controversy with the 	1
rous encroachments of the see of Rome upon the rights 	1
rous, their operations nearly resemble those of the peo- 	1
rous, the town at his devotion, and the neighbouring 	1
rous, though unarmed ; and, in order to prevent them 	1
rowly than ever ; and, though lord Scrope had given 	1
row sphere; but even here, says his friend and bio- 	1
rows, to a fire in flank from four hundred foreign fusi- 	1
royal authority, never great, was now contemptible, by 	1
royal demesnes % but the earls of Huntly had been per- 	1
royal family of Scotland, and, after Mary, the undoubted 	1
Royston, a letter of hers to Burleigh and Walsingham, 	1
r See dissertation concerning the murder of Henry Darnly, and the 	1
r ' them from danger, he issued circular letters, requiring 	1
ruin of that nobleman. This officious zeal completed 	1
ruins of popery. For this reason they determined to 	1
ruin the families of Angus and Home, which were in 	1
rupted the progress of my studies. The attendance in parlia- 	1
rupt the heart. The queeji, say they, having reached 	1
rupture, the quarrel widened into an irreparable breach, 	1
Ruthven, Kirkaldy of Grange, and a few of the most 	1
Ruthven's, who expressly affirms that the queen herself elected them. ' 	1
Ruthven was married to the king's aunt. Lindsay's 	1
rying Darnly . In the midst of this security, Mary 	1
rying through this measure, they began with sounding 	1
Rymer, xv. p. 1 10. Keith, 358. Note (c). Murdin, 368. 	1
rymple, vol. i. Append. No. ii. 	1
S2 	1
sacrificing, to a rash and youthful passion, an alliance 	1
Sadler, and to lay before them, not in their public 	1
Sadler, her commissioners to hear both parties. 	1
Sadler, the English envoy in Scotland, they were men 	1
sador, le Croc, and to his father, the earl of Lennox. 	1
safe, even in that retreat, her fears impelled her to an 	1
safety appearing in any other course, they again took treaty vio- 	1
safety. No entreaty of the queen could persuade him 	1
safety of Scotland to the interest of that ambitious and 	1
sagacious enough to see the remotest consequences of 	1
sagacity, she both foresaw the danger, and took the 	1
sages in the history of human nature, where a benevo- 	1
sages proper to be inserted in your Appendix, and proper to 	1
said he, " over-scrupulous or precise. Let us view 	1
sail for Scotland, with a numerous army, they hastily 	1
sallies of private passion, not as the consequences of 	1
sally practised in the realm, should be deemed a capital 	1
sals and dependents, were attainted : the attainder 	1
sals, and retiring to a monastery near Perth, was soon 	1
same advantage in the conference to be held at West- 	1
same cause. Mary ascended the throne of England July 6, 	1
same causes which facilitated her accession to the throne, 	1
same conditions; and several gentlemen of rank and 	1
same condition to the grant. A feudal kingdom was 	1
same day to Jedburgh. The fatigue of such a journey, 	1
same effect. The means, indeed, employed by these 	1
same. Elizabeth divided her attention almost equally 	1
same estimation as at present ; nor did haughty barons 	1
same is asserted to be the intention and effect of this act in another public 	1
same manner". 	1
same men, who were preparing to violate one of the 	1
same observation may be made with regard to Buchanan's, dialogue, De 	1
same poverty and dependence as formerly. 1562 	1
same religion with herself, she discovered no inclina- 	1
same sentiments, and become equally formidable to the 	1
same time determined to take some steps towards the 	1
same time that they manifested, with respect to the 	1
same time, the indecent and licentious lives of the clergy 	1
sanction of that assembly ; but a design to recover the 	1
sand circumstances could not but occur to awaken 	1
sand five hundred and fifty-eight, Mary of England 1558. 	1
SAN DIEGO 	1
sand men, talked in the highest strain of resentment 	1
sand pounds by it. Of the History of Scotland four- 	1
sand pounds Scottish appears to have been the whole ~~ 	1
sand seven hundred and seven, the wisdom of parlia- 	1
sanne, and my friends will be pleased to hear that I enjoy in 	1
sant in history. From the heart of Germany his opi- 	1
sarily be made in the system of university education. 	1
sarily to run counter to them. It appeared manifestly 	1
sary. Among other regulations, which are contained in one of these still 	1
sary; and, far from wanting subsistence, the English 	1
sary fear. No sooner were the protestant forces dis-~ 	1
sary, or dismiss forces which she found useful, or de- 	1
sary, they were actuated by principles and passions 	1
sary war with England, which, instead of yielding him 	1
sary was, in their opinion, the only thing which could 	1
sary. What she could not obtain by persuasion, the 	1
sat down before it, and, by an obstinate defence, pro- 	1
sations to Bothwell alone; they insinuated that the 	1
sation, that they should be terminated in that manner P. 	1
sation to the person injured, succeeded to the rigour of 	1
satisfaction; but, by appearing to continue for some 	1
satisfactory conjecture concerning the motives which 	1
satisfied with the style ? whether it did not savour somewhat 	1
satisfy Mary ; she resolved to follow the blow, and to 	1
satisfy the moderate desires of a philosopher. What I cannot 	1
saved her from this danger. By their assistance, she 	1
saved her ministers from unavoidable destruction 6 . 	1
Savoy, the uncle of her former husband. 	1
saw that the downfal of his own power must be the 	1
saw what would be the issue of this mock inquiry, and 	1
saying always an hand, an heart, an head? Have you 	1
say, that I eat nothing but ambrosia, drink nothing but nec- 	1
say, that I have now effectually stopped the mouths of all 	1
say they, surrounded with his barons, is secure from 	1
scale. 	1
scanty and precarious subsistence from the benevolence 	1
scarce any appearance of opposition to the established 	1
scarce compatible with the subsistence of civil society. 	1
scarce possible that the choice could fall on such tem- 	1
scattered passages through the volumes founded on your 	1
scent had seldom continued through three successive 	1
scheme. And as persecution was the only method for 	1
scheme. Blinded by resentment, as well as by love, 	1
scheme for posing it at this time began to be so well known, 	1
scheme had she formed against the liberty and consti- 	1
scheme of marrying the queen, his sister, was no less 	1
scheme of their destruction. The sure but concealed 	1
schemes for insurrections in different parts of the king- 	1
Schemes of Besides these intrigues, there were secretly carried 	1
scheme so flattering to his ambition: the latter con- 	1
schemes, promoted them with the utmost zeal ; and the 	1
schemes with concern, and with resentment; but the 	1
scheme was concerted for obstructing the progress of 	1
scheme, which her interest conspired with her passions 	1
science of government was extremely imperfect among 	1
science, they disdained any employment foreign from 	1
science to extirpate the protestant doctrine. Mary 	1
sciousness of defect in the evidence which he had to 	1
scope for political speculation, four different schemes 	1
Scotchman has now the pleasure of being able to pronounce 	1
Scotland. 	3
Scotland, acquired an influence in that kingdom, which 	1
Scotland, a. d. 1544, are dictated by a national animosity no less exces- 	1
Scotland, and of the Age of Charles the fifth. I believe 	1
Scotland ; and the homage done by the Scottish mo- 	1
Scotland, and were little able to establish new rights 	1
Scotland, at that time, parties were summoned, in cases of treason, forty 	1
Scotland began to be talked of; and, on that account, 	1
Scotland by the feelings of her heart, rather than by 	1
Scotland had ever seen. A few were taken prisoners, 	1
Scotland had nothing to dread from a princess of Mary's 	1
Scotland, had taken part with the congregation. Mary, 	1
Scotland, he found, upon the death of Edward, that 	1
Scotland. His successors adopted the same plan, and 	1
Scotland impossible ; but the national poverty, and the 	1
Scotland, in behalf of the exiles, was of more weight 	1
Scotland , in despite of all men. He is a glorious, rash, and hazardous young 	1
Scotland in- In the beginning of September, the earl of Hertford, 	1
Scotland is the quarter whence they can attack England 	1
Scotland might invade England where it is weakest 	1
Scotland. She had already brought one actor upon 	1
Scotland, tempt, under which he had now fallen, and the state of 	1
Scotland, the same form of government was established jj^dom* * 	1
Scotland. The weapons, the discipline, and impetuosity 	1
Scotland. This she endeavoured to conceal from Eli- 	1
Scotland, was disgraceful to the nation. He deceived 	1
Scotland was of the most bigoted and illiberal kind. 	1
Scotland, was the professed design of the contracting 	1
Scotland were obvious from the marriage which he had 	1
Scotland, where I would choose, both for my own sake 	1
Scotland, with great concern ; and, as she well foresaw 1559. 	1
Scots agreed to send their sovereign into England, as 	1
Scots, and ready to enter her kingdom; and, if the 	1
Scots, as to be little scrupulous about the means which 	1
Scots could form so many pretensions, occupied by a 	1
Scots. Elizabeth, perceiving it was calculated of pur- 	1
Scots fled, were strewed with spears, and swords, and 	1
Scots, in any future exigency, to hope for the continu- 	1
Scots included in the peace agreed upon. 	1
Scots must either have accepted of his terms, or have 	1
Scots, or to the conquest of her country. A few small 	1
Scots seemed to distrust the justice of their cause; and 	1
Scots, sensible of the security which they derived from 	1
Scots should continue inactive ; and a long tranquillity 	1
Scots slain 403 	1
Scots were ready to proceed to the most violent ex- 	1
Scottish barons, naturally free and bold, were prompted 	1
Scottish deputies, Mary had been persuaded to sub- 	1
Scottish kings early demonstrated how much they were 	1
Scottish monarchs were accustomed to live among their 	1
Scottish monarchy, to the reign of Kenneth the second. The 	1
Scottish nobility joined the congregation. The lords 	1
Scottish nobles agreed, on this occasion, to pass from 111 	1
Scottish nobles, and among these the earls of Argyll and Rothes, who were 	1
Scottish nobles from the vengeance of their prince ; and 	1
Scottish physicians had pronounced to be incurable. 	1
Scottish queen. 	2
Scottish queen 2 . 	1
Scottish queen, carried on under her direction. There 	1
Scottish queen ; he complained of it as a groundless 	1
Scottish queen's authority. Catherine and Mary had 	1
Scottish queen stoop at last to the thoughts of taking 	1
Scottish queen to a trial for that crime r . The parents 	1
Scottish queen with a subject was far from being disagreeable to Elizabeth. 	1
Scottish queen, would naturally exasperate her to a 	1
scribed imperfectly formed ; but in Scotland, whether 	1
scribed what terms he pleased to the English minister, 	1
scribed within narrower limits than ever ; the preroga- 	1
scribe privately three deeds, equally unjust and invalid ; 	1
script, to which I had not formerly access, has enabled 	1
scruple or jealousy, to the king and to the greater ba- 	1
scruples, and satisiy the delicacy, of the English queen. 	1
scrupulous exactness. The fortifications of Leith were 	1
seasonable conclusion of a truce had not procured her 	1
seau's, in which that philosopher says, that he had never 	1
second. 	1
second, and had contended for the government of that 	1
second and third volumes. A long and eventful period is 	1
second. Bruce, was disturbed by the pretensions of Edward 	1
second days of April. Ibid. 101. He was summoned at Perth, April the 	1
seconded by most of his attendants, at length deter- 	1
second fourteen years of their copyright splendidly, by pub- 	1
second, from Kenneth's conquest of the Picts, to the 	1
second, had been the minister of James the first, and 	1
second, indeed, bore the same title. It was not, how- 	1
second obtained a law, annexing all regalities, which 	1
second violation of the law ; and a third act of disobe- 	1
secretary of state, and a man of so great reputation. For I 	1
secretary replied, that I should be in London in a few days, 	1
secretary, was dismissed from her service, and Rizio advanced to that office, 	1
secret correspondence with England, and received all 	1
secret distrust, frequent quarrels, succeeded to their for- 	1
secretly determined against it ; and scarcely desired by 	1
secret sentiments of their hearts. Any open discovery 	1
secret treason, and may defy open rebellion. But those 	1
secure. Rome trembled for the catholic faith, under a 	1
securing the succession of the crown in the house of 	1
security, and for quieting his guilty fears. This was a 	1
security and negligence of the English ; many of their 	1
secuting the design, ^he king promised to acknowledge 	1
secution of their claims would endanger their lives, 	1
See Append. No. II. 	1
seeds of many quarrels and contentions. These, as we 	1
seeing; he passed through this city in his way to Paris, while 	1
seeing that the queen of England would take part in 	1
seek revenge on that cunning prelate, who, by sacrificing 	1
seemed imprudent to expose her person, at this time, to 	1
seemed, through the day, to be swallowed up in pro- 	1
seemed to provide for the security of the subject, with- 	1
seemed to render them of small consequence. These 	1
seemed to require that the monuments of popery, which 	1
seemingly inexplicable, and which merits particular at- the Scottish 	1
seemingly suspended ; was never altogether abandoned. 	1
seem not to have been more regular and exemplary 	1
seems to consider this to have been the common practice. Hist. 149. 	1
seems to have been her favourite passion ; and, though P ?"?' 	1
seems to have had it much at heart, in the beginning of vour. 	1
seen and experienced. 	1
seen enlisted under the banner of puritanic intole- 	1
seen in his company. But I know your affection for 	1
seen only the effect, we may be able to discover the 	1
seen resistance, Murray's northern troops, who had fled ~ 	1
see reason to conform your narrative in vol. ii. p. 139, 140, to 	1
seized and condemned as lawful prizes . The Scots, 	1
seized, April 24. 158. The time which must have elapsed, by this account 	1
seized. Captain Blackadder and three others were 	1
seized on her person, and conducted her, together with 	1
seized on the gate of the castle, which was set open to 1546&gt; 	1
seized the party at Edinburgh, that before the army 	1
seize her ministers, it is probable he would have imparted it to his principal 	1
seize Stirling, a place of some strength, and, from its 	1
seldom able to reduce them to the same state in which 	1
seldom attended parliaments, the ecclesiastics formed a 	1
seldom occasion to use her balance; the sword alone 	1
seldom omitting any opportunity of taking a share in 	1
seldom ventures to make a breach hi it, but in cases of 	1
self accused of the crime, and calculated on purpose to 	1
self, and suspicious of a new conspiracy against his 	1
self as chosen to be judge in the controversy between 	1
self, being cousins within the prohibited degrees, and 	1
self," but admirably suited to the temper and wishes of 	1
self. But, under this veil of friendship and generosity, 	1
self &gt; care. A proclamation was published by the king, pro- 	1
self. He discovered a reluctance at undertaking that 	1
self inflict the vengeance due on that account. The 	1
self injured, because all were contemned. Their dis- 	1
self into the hands of justice, and rely on her clemency. 	1
self, once more, to the guidance of favourites ; and the 	1
self out of the kingdom, but left her adherents dis- 	1
self passed through the same labours of the same consum- 	1
Self-preservation, it is probable, forced men at first into 	1
self was one of the persons who subscribed it. Keith, 383. The king's 	1
self which it always discovers. In Mary's situation, an 	1
self, who ascribes the consent of the nobles to Bothwell's artifices, " who 	1
seller desired him to prepare for a second edition. In 	1
sels could not fail of transporting, beyond all bounds of 	1
selves, and threw an oblique reflection on the queen 	1
selves breathe all the ardour and tenderness of love. 	1
selves, but is always forced upon them by some foreign 	1
selves ; flattered by the imitation of their neighbours ; 	1
selves in his quarrel, as a common cause ; and every 	1
selves, or have heard from others ; so that you see I am be- 	1
selves. The church, the army, the revenue, were under 	1
selves the whole regal authority. One of their first 	1
selves to take the field, when called, and to serve him 	1
selves with the mob, which in Scotland, as in other 	1
sembled. 	1
semble the first propagators of Christianity, the popish 	1
semble their followers, and to take arms in defence of 	1
semble their followers, whom, out of confidence in her 	1
sembly, at last enabled him to set the question at rest 	1
sembly complained, with some bitterness, of the stop 	1
sembly of the church, to draw them to a personal inter- 	1
sembly which was called to deliberate on matters of 	1
sence. 	1
sence; and wrote to her in a strain very different from July 13. 	1
sence of mind that rarely fall to the lot of man, and 	1
sence of near thirteen years, landed safely at Leith in 1561. 	1
sence with the same distinguished familiarity as for- 	1
send commissioners to St. Andrew's, who should la- 	1
send him over the new editions of all my writings; and I 	1
send me, and what will be necessary to give any light to this 	1
sends her 	1
sense of duty, or from views of interest, renounced the 	1
sense of Elizabeth's friendship, which she ascribes 	1
sensible of the exorbitant power of the nobility, and tne r y a l 	1
Sensible of these difficulties, Robertson resolved, if 	1
sensibly felt. The inhabitants, strangers to industry, 	1
sent age ; and though I feel myself the Lepidus, I contem- 	1
sent, and sat as a member in that meeting of privy 	1
sentation, within a few hours of each other, and leaving 	1
sentatives in a long and eloquent speech on the catholic 	1
sent conduct. These were derived from another, and 	1
sent earl, acted as chief of the name of Douglas. 	1
sented a recent and alarming example of this nature. 	1
sented as the subversion of every sacred right for which 	1
sented that the queen should continue to reside in Scot- 	1
sented the affront, by declaring war against Scotland. 	1
sented to an act, by which the laity were permitted to 	1
sented to share these in common with them. The Sept. 18. 	1
sented to the murder, but with being accessory to the 	1
sentence became almost impracticable. Theft, rapine, 	1
sentence of divorce. This fatal marriage was the prin- 	1
sentence of forfeiture might be legally pronounced 	1
sentences, several persons of distinction were condemned 	1
sentence which he had not power to execute, Edward 	1
sent establishment of religion in Scotland, and receive 	1
sent her to the tower r . 	1
sent him back into Scotland, animated with the same 	1
sentiments among the nobles encouraged a few des- 	1
sentiments, and superior to all fear z . - 	1
sentiments concerning civil government. The genius 	1
sentiments less shocking ; resentment and disappointed 	1
sentiments of it to the king and queen. But, instead 	1
sentiments of the nation, as could not fail of gaining the 	1
sentiments of the nation were not different from her 	1
sentiments we may entertain concerning the justice or 	1
sentiments with regard to her husband, gave a great 	1
sentiment, the express words of the treaty of Edin- 	1
senting to nothing that tended to introduce any alter- 	1
sent me no present which on its own account I should have 	1
sentment. 	1
sentment, and felt sensibly the disadvantage of being 	1
sent me very earnestly to know the gentleman's name, that 	1
sent of parliament to laws more advantageous to the 	1
sent situation r . She hoped that such a discovery of 	1
sent, with the utmost expedition, to the governors of 	1
separation being visible, and often expressed in the 	1
September 5, he writes that the rage of the people still continued so violent, 	1
September ^ nothing, but that the English might escape from him 	1
Sept. l. Meantime, sir John Gordon set out towards Stirling ; 	1
sequence of an alarm as ill-grounded in the southern 	1
sequence of their possessions in that kingdom, bound 	1
sequence of the resignation of lord Bute, in 1764, 	1
sequence of these notions, the possession of land was 	1
sequence of these peculiar circumstances, added to the 	1
sequences, enabled him to execute his schemes with 	1
sequence they describe minutely ; but with regard to 	1
sequence to himself, and to the kingdom. After the 	1
sequence to the nation, the taking a few steps without 	1
sequent calamities of Mary's life. Ever since her re- 	1
sequent transactions, we shall endeavour to open with 	1
seration of her sufferings, had engaged them in dif- 	1
series of blunders in politics ; and while he esteemed 	1
series of inferior judicatories rising, one above another, 	1
serve, and did not suffer him to possess any authority r . 	1
served by all his neighbours. Ambassadors, a kind of 	1
served him not only with the fidelity of vassals, but 	1
served the intrepid and desperate valour peculiar to 	1
served with pleasure that it now began to subside. 	1
serves with respect to Elizabeth, may be extended, 	1
serve to be traced. 	1
serve your friendship, and whose character and conversation 	1
serve you with that grateful zeal which your clemency 	1
service. But, in order to preserve the counties most 	1
service. He is an ingenious man, but unfortunate in his 	1
services to the crown in all times past. The surrender 	1
service ; when we hear that all marks of distinction, 	1
sessed. 	1
sessed advantages peculiar to themselves : the accidental 	1
sessed hardly any shadow of military power during 	1
sessed. He had no reason to expect the concurrence 	1
sessed the authority of a king, stood in person at her 	1
session, and the prospect of mounting the throne of 	1
session of a present advantage was preferred to the 	1
session of the houses, which they had obliged them to 	1
sessions, form a presbytery ; and a plurality of pres- 	1
set a dangerous example to other subjects, and Mary's 	1
set an example to her other subjects by subscribing a 	1
Seton and Borthwick were the only persons of rank 	1
set out for Stirling, in order to celebrate the baptism of 	1
sets Mary's conduct in the most favourable point of 	1
set the monks at liberty from their confinement, they 	1
set them the first example of disputing the will of their 	1
settled cloud of adversity, with few gleams of hope, and 	1
settled, the princes of Lorrain might resume their am- 1568. 	1
settlement at Gladsmuir ; in 1758, having received the 	1
settling some commercial differences between the two 	1
settling the nation; but, after the injuries which they 	1
set up for independence : and though there might be a 	1
seven members, all of whom are laymen ; the univer- 	1
seven, the only brother of the king of France was mur- 	1
seventh of March, 1566, in your Appendix, No. xv. p. 22. 	1
several ages, contains little else but the accounts of the 	1
several instances of such alienations of church lands, by the popish incum- 	1
several instructions to H. Killigrew, dated the tenth of Sep- 	1
Several of these lords, particularly the earl of Huntly, 	1
Several of these were now assembled at Hamilton, in 	1
several petty castles; whereas, by fortifying a few places 	1
several places, so that his followers were obliged to 	1
Several prelates, zealously attached to the ancient 	1
several proclamations and acts of council for that pur- 	1
several provinces of Germany, in England, and in the 	1
several skirmishes and inroads, which, as they did not 	1
several weeks, all the hardships and terrour of a prison; ~ 	1
severity of her natural temper carried the acrimony of 	1
shadow might not be observed from without; and, 	1
shaken, or laid it in ruins, the foundations of that an- 	1
shall be made against you ; and, this done, pass over to the Fifeland, and 	1
shall enjoy, will be partly employed in the prosecution of 	1
shall ever be bestowed upon it. 	1
shall find Henry labouring to extend his influence in 	1
shall find on the spot ; and that country is not destitute of 	1
shall proceed with cautious steps to compose and to correct, 	1
share in the administration of government. These 	1
sharing with yourself. The abbe appears to hate, and affects 	1
she acquired every accomplishment that could add to 	1
she affected, at that time, to treat the queen of Scots. 	1
she applied to them with a particular attention ; and 	1
She began already to feel the wretched condition to 	1
She blamed both her choice of lord Darnly, and the favour. 	1
She commanded her commissioners to testify her indig- 	1
She commanded him to declare, in the strongest terms, 	1
she could not venture to offend. 	1
she demanded, or permit her to retire out of the king- 	1
she despatched Throkmorton into Scotland, with power June 30. 	1
She did not, on that account, intermit in the least 	1
she did not scruple publicly to employ her authority 	1
shed the blood of his enemy. To forgive an injury, 	1
she either abandon measures which she deemed neces- 	1
Sheep 1 2,492 	1
sheet could be easily cancelled, and an Appendix formed 	1
She even condescended to court the protestant clergy ; 	1
She expected that the regent would accuse Mary of 	1
she foresaw and dreaded. 	1
she found established in the kingdom, and after taking notice of what ad- 	1
she had become acquainted with the eager and impa- 1559. 	1
she had been a prisoner at the mercy of her most in- 	1
She had been contriving for some time how to reesta- 	1
she had gained many to favour her title g . All the 	1
she had hitherto held among neighbouring princes ; the 	1
She had industriously avoided every opportunity of 	1
she had never laid aside the design, nor lost the hopes, 	1
she had no right to confer upon him, by her private 	1
she had promised, her protection, she would forfeit the 	1
she had stooped in order to raise him, his behaviour 	1
she had swayed so long, she felt a pang of grief and 	1
she hoped, by means of the French troops, to overawe 	1
She instantly mounted on horseback, and rode full 	1
she intently gazed upon it, and musing, in a thoughtful 	1
she, " is less dreadful than such an ignominious step. 	1
She is soli- 	1
She listened, therefore, with partiality, to the Spanish 	1
sheltered them from the impending storm, but per- 	1
shelter himself. Nor would it have been an easy mat- 	1
she made choice of Mar, as the place whence he should 	1
she married lord Darnly. The ceremony was performed ^""ith 	1
She might have been concealed in that retired corner, 	1
she might have renounced, from that moment, all hopes 	1
she might overcome the regent's scruples, and persuade 	1
she now employed all her art to appease Mary' 1 , to 	1
she observed no defects in the man whom she had 	1
She offers 	1
she possessed all the intrepidity of spirit, and all the 	1
she pretended to be the intention of the conference ; 	1
she professed. 	1
she promises that she would bend her whole strength 	1
she recalled the earl of Lennox and his son in such 	1
She received the English ambassador with respect; 	1
She rejected it without hesitation. " Death," said 	1
She resolves These prudent remonstrances of Throkmorton, to 	1
she retired into Leith, and determined patiently to wait 	1
She seized the places of strength which belonged to 	1
She sends 	1
she set out for Hamilton ; and, travelling at the same 	1
she surmounted in parliament the force of a national 	1
she thought it proper to remove the queen, as soon as 	1
She treated this stranger with a familiarity, and ad- 	1
she ventured to attend him, vol. iii. 446. This, if it had been true, would 	1
she wanted firmness, however, to resist the influence by the soli- 	1
she was assured that he resolved instantly to leave the 1567. 	1
She was born in England, and, by a maxim of law in 	1
She was influenced in two cases so opposite, by merit 	1
she was loaded'. 	1
she was pursuing, and beseeching her to quiet the fears 	1
she was treated by the common soldiers with the ut- 	1
she wept, she threatened, she reproached them with 	1
she would dismiss Bothwell from her presence, and 	1
she would have it entirely in her own power to protract 	1
she would suffer the regent and his adherents to be 	1
she would willingly come into a measure, which tended 	1
she wrote to the Scottish queen in such high terms; 	1
ship and respect which she had hitherto used in all 	1
ship has forgot his vow of answering us, and of washing queen 	1
ship, however, are seldom neglected among princes; 	1
ship of that church, lay more open to observation, and, 	1
ships, which are very agreeable ; much more so than silly, 	1
ships, which had accompanied him from Dunbar, and, 	1
ship towards the French q . But these were only ap- 	1
ship was not of long duration. James abandoned him- 	1
ship which always did, and I hope always will, subsist be- 	1
ship with England, and closely allied with the French 	1
shires which she most suspected, to join in associations 	1
shocking to a generous and brave nobility, than the 	1
shocking to humanity, by maxims the most repugnant 	1
shocking to the heart of a father, than fatal to all his 	1
shop Keith, Hist. p. 44, published a fragment. It does not authorize us to 	1
short but only scene of her life in which fortune smiled 	1
shortest issue. It was the work but of one day, to ex- 	1
should again make choice of a husband, among the 	1
should ascribe it to the immediate care of providence, 	1
should be disbanded, and the gates of Perth set open 	1
should be forfeited, to the crown, and declaring the 	1
should begin not to read only, but to study the history 	1
should be passed in the ensuing parliament, and be 	1
should be prosecuted. 	1
should be published among the statutes securing the protestant religion. 	1
should be vested in his person. By the laws of Scot- 	1
should constrain the English to retire into their own 	1
should grow still more formidable. 	1
should have public encouragement to enable him to 	1
should hold ; or, if there appeared to be any danger or 	1
should immediately be held, in order to compose what- 	1
should not marry or leave issue, adds, with his usual caution : " This song 	1
should not, under the colour of punishing any violation 	1
should pass, the hydra of popery would again ravage 	1
should publicly embrace it. The queen, after some 	1
should put them into her hands, and she would by that means 	1
should receive that she hath deserved there by order of jus- 	1
should reply to the accusation preferred by Murray 	1
should view the power and possessions of the church 	1
showed me. How would you have turned pale at the sight ! 	1
shown any extraordinary delicacy on that head. An 	1
siastical character, yet I have often wished to be free 	1
siastical power which their predecessors had reared 	1
siastical revenues. Among the lay members, some were 	1
siastical tyranny, they did, in no instance, transgress 	1
siastics alone were conversant in them, this procured 	1
sible, amidst the contradictions of historians, to decide 	1
sible and more impatient; quick in discerning, and 	1
sible in his whole conduct ; but the character of a cruel 	1
sibly disturb its peace. 	1
sic omnia dixisses, I should never have been plagued 	1
sided among them, and seldom appeared at court, where 	1
sided in the castle of St. Andrew's, which he had forti- 	1
side Hill. This the regent had the precaution to seize, 	1
side. His followers instantly endeavoured to break 	1
sident writes to Cecil, that Murray was assuredly informed that a design 	1
siderable body of infantry, which was destined for 	1
siderable source both of wealth and of power to the 	1
siderable sum to be applied for the support of the ministry. Keith, 360, 	1
siderable train. Had any military operation been necessary, as is supposed, 	1
siderable, was wholly engrossed by the clergy, added to 	1
sideration of uninformed natural acuteness, that I have 	1
siderations, James broke his agreement with Henry, 	1
siderations which had formerly weighed with her. She 	1
sideration thereof, the Scottish queen's interest should be acknowledged in 	1
sidered as the boldest and most masterly stroke of 	1
sidered as valid. By the oath of fidelity of the Scottish commissioners to 	1
sidered it as a probable device for restoring his mis- 	1
sides, that she had oftentimes gone about to make a regency 	1
sidies which were due, and refused those which were 	1
siding secretly among the lords of the congregation, 	1
siege, and soon obliged the garrison to capitulate. 	1
sieged the beds of the sick and of the dying ; they suf- 	1
sieur, monsieur Gibbon a Lausanne en Suisse. I shall often 	1
sighed often, and cried out " Farewell, France! Fare- 	1
sight of the loyalty and subjection which were due to 	1
signal to engage, the earl ordered them to retire to 	1
signification of their consent- and approbation was yet 	1
sign the crown, and making use of her son's name to 	1
sign, to increase the violence of this passion. Soon 	1
silence concerning the person on whom she wished the ~ 	1
silence of Randolph on that head. But I apprehend, that in 	1
similar nature, the jurisdiction of the nobles in criminal 	1
simulation, envy, and fear q ." Lennox 	1
since the beginning of the reign of James the first, and * 	1
siness of much importance employed their attention. 	1
sing ground. The confederates advanced to the attack 	1
single blow, they took possession of the capital of the 	1
single bullet, through the lower part of his belly, and 	1
single drop of blood, set her son, an infant of a year 	1
single life, and his being born her own subject, would 	1
single mass pronounced to be more formidable to the 	1
single name ; in place of baron, substitute king, and we 	1
single papist was admitted into any degree of confi- 	1
singular institution distinguished by the name of ' sodalitium ;' a voluntary 	1
sionary, and treated it with the utmost scorn 8 . 	1
sionate fondness, she departed, in order to gratify them, 	1
sion. At that very instant the broken cavalry, having 	1
sioned among such as were attached to him ; while the 	1
sioned a remarkable alteration in the political state of 	1
sioned a secret murmuring among the protestants who 	1
sioned by the despair of a single man, rather than any open insurrection of 	1
sioners. take. All his associates declined the office; they 	1
sioners than to his own associates. They knew that he 	1
sion. Her pride would never stoop to an alliance with a 1565. 	1
sion, I shall have the satisfaction of doing you a real credit 	1
sion is, that the person who feels the injury should him- 	1
sion. it was entirely owing to the over-caution of the French, 	1
sion, neither then* religious sentiments, nor their former 	1
sion of a day, and to perish with it, in return for your 	1
sion of parliament ; that a parliament should be held 	1
sion of the papal throne in Scotland ; and, by a singu- 	1
sion, opposed it with great zeal. But a party, which 	1
sion perplexed and undecided; and, by industriously 	1
sions altered his temper, and, perhaps, impaired his 	1
sions, and against various crimes ; and, besides exclud- 	1
sions a tu- c i ama (;i ons which were dictated by a zeal more sincere 	1
sion, says bishop Gleig, recommended him more, per- 	1
sions, beat up their quarters, intercepted their convoys 1559. 	1
sions, by which Scotland was reduced to be a province eluded, 	1
sions came, gradually, and by various methods of aliena- 	1
sions. Darnly was not superior to his father in under- 	1
sions, for its reception. 	1
sions had taken such strong possession of the human 	1
sions of friendship to be void of sincerity, she frankly 	1
sions of the enemy ; and having done what they thought 	1
sions or mistakes in it, (and I dare say you will discover 	1
sions the other was known to bear little favour; and 	1
sions, they established, by mutual consent, such regu- 	1
sions to the English succession. In order to save her 	1
sions which fell to the crown by the forfeiture of his 	1
sions, while they were pursuing ends just and neces- 	1
sion to the crown, and a public ratification of his con- 	1
sion was now requisite, in order to remove them. In 	1
sion, which, in a later age, will be matter of ridicule to men 	1
sion which suspicion inspires. The present uncertainty 	1
sion with Cecil, as judge martial of the army, and printed in 1548, deserves 	1
Sir, 	1
Sir Alexander Dick communicated to me a very valu- 	1
Sir David Dalrymple not only communicated to me 	1
sired an interview with the prior of St. Andrew's, the 	1
SIR, I have now got forward to the year 1660, and as it will 	1
SIR, I have taken the liberty to send you inclosed a preface 	1
SIR, I intend to employ some of the idle time of this win- 	1
SIR, I received but a few days ago the favour of your 	1
sirous of peace, Robert formed a scheme for checking 	1
sistance from him, which the malecontents, in the suc- 	1
sistance of so powerful an ally, the high honours which 	1
sistence became greater, and was more sensibly felt. 	1
sistence. Considerable bodies of infantry were kept in 	1
sistence which distinguishes his character, he, in his 	1
sistently with her own honour, or with the safety of 	1
sistent, perhaps, with the human condition. At proper in- 	1
sistent with the clerical character to give any counte- 	1
sister and ally to her throne. Elizabeth would, once 	1
sisterly love, with reciprocal declarations of unchange- 	1
sister, the dutchess of Suffolk. 	1
sister, the queen of Spain, had been often proposed ; 	1
sistible if centred in a few. When nobles are nume- 	1
sisting of four thousand horse and one thousand foot, 	1
sist on a personal interview, a condition which she 	1
site scale. By this happy device, the liberty of Italy 	1
sities send five members, who may be either laymen or 	1
sition ; and the protestant religion was, once more, esta- 	1
sition ; and the royal authority remained uncontrolled, 	1
sition, that we must search for the motives of her pre- 	1
sition. Though several of the nobles were still assem- 	1
sition, to be confined as a prisoner within his own pa- 	1
sition to the crown rose to a height, the burgesses and 	1
sitting in parliament, is surpassed by that only with 	1
situated on the main ocean". 	1
situation, and seemed to be deeply affected with it y . 	1
situation, no resolution could be more imprudent. A 	1
situation rendered it most necessary, appears singular ; 	1
sity, and carried on without success. Many persons of 	1
sity of Edinburgh, he went to London to concert mea- 	1
sive against the throne; and, as their obligation was 	1
sive. I found them in the collection of papers belonging to the duke of 	1
sive of the liberties and constitution of the kingdom. 	1
sive of the same fate, made his escape out of the castle, 	1
sive, they submitted to their decision a question, one of 	1
sixteenth century, was such as can hardly be conceived by their posterity. 	1
sixteenth of James the fifth, a. d. 1529, a pound weight of gold, when 	1
sixth first obliged them to send representatives regularly 	1
sixth month of her pregnancy, and though Rizio might 	1
sixth, we reckon ten princes ; and seven of these were 	1
S kased ficulties which would attend her marrying a foreign 	1
s Keith, 134, etc. 	1
skies. The annual sittings of the assembly continue 	1
skilful hands ; the smallest variations were attended to, 	1
skill of such able masters in controversy, they appoint- 	1
slaving their country. 	1
slender train. She every moment expected the ap- 	1
s Lesley, de Reb. Gest. Scot. 189. 	1
Slxth d tion all the weight and validity in their power, by pro- 	1
small body of the nobles, however, continuing faithful 	1
small body of those troops, maintained in constant pay, 	1
small effect in rendering the nobles considerable. The Uc 	1
smaller ones sheltered themselves under the jurisdic- 	1
smallest addition to their number, and a considerable 	1
small fleet, took a part of it, and obliged him to fly 	1
small forts, which they possessed in different parts of 	1
small inclination to impose the same law on the queen 	1
small number of the English prevented their taking more prisoners. 	1
small number, while they themselves had no other labour 	1
small ; they had embraced the principles of the refor- 	1
s Melv. 126. 	1
Smith, Alexander Wedderburn, afterwards lord chan- 	1
Smith, Mr. Ferguson, and, if he should still be with you, to 	1
Smollett ; and you have the impudence to squeeze yourself by 	1
sociates were summoned to appear, in order to justify 	1
sociates. While he enjoyed liberty, the regent could 	1
so detestable, in the space of three months, is not to 	1
so dishonourable to all the persons who acted a part in 	1
soever his sagacity might be, could venture to foretell 	1
so far as to require that she should answer to their 	1
so far superior to himself both in power and in favour d . 	1
so far superior to the other nobles in abilities, might 	1
so far u . 	1
so frequently in our history. Nothing, however, de- 	1
softened by the female character, and accompanied with the office 	1
Softened by the pleasures of an elegant court, flattered 	1
so high a strain of her displeasure at the intended 	1
so high. But it is neither in the depravity of the hu- 	1
so important, its influence on the operations of the 	1
so incontested, as to render the conduct of the English 	1
so insolent and unjustifiable, were still fresh in her ne gi ect . 	1
so irregular and unsatisfactory f . Applies for 	1
soldiers having been called in to the assistance of the 	1
soldiers received for their personal service. In con- 	1
soldiers. The vassals of the king, and the sub-vassals 	1
soldiers ; while some of inferior rank, interposing too 	1
solemnity. But the very first step discovered it to be Reel's 	1
solence, and obstinacy, were the injuries of which Mary 	1
solence they could no longer tolerate. This resolution 	1
solicitations of his mistress in behalf of Leicester*. 	1
solicitations of the countess of Lennox. 	1
solicited the aid of the king of Spain, the avowed and 	1
solicited this liberty for her son. Elizabeth was no 	1
solicited. This young nobleman was the hereditary 	1
solicitor-general, and, by their permission, I proposed 	1
solicitous to acquire new authority, or to form new pre- 	1
solicitude for Mary's liberty, and even for her reputa- 	1
solicitude to reconcile Elizabeth to the measure ; and 	1
so little able to disperse them, or to defend his daughter 	1
so little scrupulous about the justice of the ends which 	1
so long abused. She burst into tears of indignation, 	1
so long and so intimately connected with Murray, and 	1
so long a period no violation of public order or tran- 	1
so long as he should be detained a prisoner, and sub- 	1
so long as the first of February, for I well know that the 	1
so long treated with contempt. Some of them were in 	1
solute, and plainly discovered that he wished to evade 	1
solute : he saw a regular administration of government ; 	1
solution of labours, I would previously, though by the imper- 	1
solution, the source of many calamities to themselves I 56 ^ ducated 	1
solved to attempt some higher and more important 	1
solved to bring Bothwell immediately to trial. But, Mary con- 	1
solved to celebrate the baptism of the young prince with 1566. 	1
so many princes, was at last decided by the sudden 	1
so many unfavourable circumstances, be brought to a 	1
some, and intimidated others, he prevailed on all who 	1
some attempts towards a coalition with them, but with- 	1
some attention, were it accompanied with any certainty. History of 	1
some care. 	1
some degree, the rude inhabitants, and the Britons were 	1
some dreaded his furious temper, others complained of 	1
some entire counties, but one person was present ; while, 	1
some evidence of her sincerity in prosecuting the mur- 	1
some expressions, as if she would choose him for her 	1
some extraordinary relief, she arrived there. The 	1
some gardens and enclosures adjacent. In this advan- 	1
some important facts relating to Scotland ; and the tra- 	1
some invitations, and some intentions of taking a trip to Paris ; 	1
some men, and to gratify the love of the marvellous 	1
some occasions, chimerical systems of policy, too refined 	1
some occasions than obstinate on others ; yet to those 	1
some of the best officers, who were formed in the long 	1
Some of the But the confederates, notwithstanding their extraor- 	1
Some of their more sagacious leaders, having foreseen 	1
some of the most avowed and zealous advocates for the 	1
Some of the northern counties of England were 	1
some other descendant of the royal blood. The former 	1
some passionately attached to the Romish superstition, 	1
some person whose fall might convince all ranks of men, 	1
some rash threatenings against him, which he let fall n , 	1
some reason, of the loss which he sustained, but had 	1
Some seemed desirous of adhering to the plan, on which 	1
some suspicion, by delaying my acknowledgment of so 	1
some time, a real influence upon the conduct of the 	1
some time at St. Andrew's, in pledge of his fidelity, 	1
sometimes attacked the most powerful chieftains. They 	1
some unforeseen accident, or the vigilance of her keep- 	1
somewhat in one point; with regard to which, during 	1
somewhat more equal. After some dark and unsuccess- 	1
some who had hitherto zealously concurred with the 	1
Some years after this (1757) John Home, then mi- 	1
some years in France, where he commanded the Scot- 	1
so much by the ambition of literary applause, as by 	1
so much for the honour of your country. I am, with great 	1
so much importance, were great. The meeting was 	1
so much noise as that between Broughton and the one-eyed 	1
so much towards the progress of the reformation, by J-nuesTo 	1
so much weight and power into whatever scale it fell, 	1
sonable actions, of their seizing her person by force of 	1
sonal and flattering nature ; and I shall often whisper 	1
son, and, after many extravagancies, broke out at last 	1
son, and a stranger to her company. To a woman, and 	1
son ; and rejected the intercession in behalf of Murray, 	1
son both to fear and to hate. 	1
so nearly concerned her, that, without coming to any 	1
so neglected. The extraordinary expenses occasioned 	1
son for it, which has been founded on Camden's words, though, if that had 	1
sonnets, and contracts, that have been so often men- 	1
so noble a present as that of your History of America. 	1
son on such security. 4. The furious passions of Darnly, the fierceness of 	1
son, or in vigour of mind. His understanding was good, 	1
son or of his fame ! Against such men a king contend- 	1
son present was called in his turn to declare his senti- 	1
son quitted the school of Dalkeith, and again resided 	1
sons, and to preserve the possession of those revenues 	1
son's book, in a letter dated from Paris, the fourteenth 	1
son she determined, if possible, to get the start of Eli- 	1
son should be both^a lord and a vassal, independent in 	1
son should presume to dispute it; and if either Rizio 	1
son, so far exceeded any crime she could impute to 	1
sons of distinction were entrusted with the administra- 	1
sons of power and influence throughout the nation, as ~ 	1
sons, or the security of that form of government which 	1
sons the most remarkable for the activity of their zeal 	1
son. The train was laid by herself, and she had no against the 	1
son, to have lost the queen's confidence, and who, about 	1
son to think that, in that age, they would be loaded 	1
son who had a right, by the law of Scotland, to govern 	1
son without making him acquainted: that his mother was 	1
so often occur to disconcert the schemes, and to intimi- 	1
so often, they could deceive no longer; and, without 	1
soon adjusted by men of so great dexterity in business; 	1
Soon after, lord Boyd returned into Scotland, and 	1
Soon after the publication of his Disquisition, his 	1
Soon after, the regent marched with an army, con- 	1
Soon after this discussion Dr. Robertson withdrew 	1
Soon after this sudden revolution in his political prin- and to per- 	1
soon appeared. 	1
soon as she attained the full age of ten years, and in- 	1
soon became impatient of the severe and constant duty 	1
sooner was the government of the kingdom in the 	1
soon have enabled him to recover, he, at once, alarmed 	1
soon in a condition to take the field; and, though far 	1
soon spent its rage ; but now a deliberate and universal 	1
soon take back whereupon, wheretinto, and wherewithal. 	1
soon to have great satisfaction from the reading of my fine 	1
sophy. I only think that in one or two points you have 	1
sordid parsimony of his father obliged him either to 	1
so shamefully in the beginning of the action, willing to 	1
so ; this warrant they had in their custody, and exhibited. Anders, vol. iv. 	1
so uncommon and dangerous, as the accusing his so- 	1
sounded the ports where it would be most proper to 	1
sound policy, she became the instrument of exciting civil 	1
so unpolished. The same observation may be made 	1
sources of their power were considerable ; and singular 	1
source, which, among a trading people, flows with such 	1
south and the other in the north of Scotland, began 	1
so valuable a correspondent as yourself. I should have thank- 	1
sovereign. 	1
sovereign, and might have been easily induced to ex- 	1
sovereign appeared, they endeavoured to regain the 	1
sovereign. A small body, on the contrary, is more sen- 	1
sovereign authority was, by this treaty, transferred 	1
sovereign in the private use of the mass. The protes- 	1
sovereign of such atrocious crimes. He, in order to 	1
sovereign. They were sensible, at once, of the indignity 	1
sovereign to his vassal. Accordingly, about the be- 	1
sovereign. Twelve earls, thirteen lords, five eldest sons 	1
sovereign who trespass against the duty which they 	1
sovereign with insensibility ; and so strong was their 	1
so visibly to save the reputation, and to increase the 	1
Spain. 	1
Spain ; and Philip had prevailed on the queen of Eng- a war with 	1
Spain furnished him a gallant and hardy infantry, to 	1
spair which we have already described. Her resent- 	1
Spaniards in their American conquests. A better 	1
spatch and unanimity ; and, in none of our historians, 	1
spatches of any French minister that resided in London. 	1
spatch than unanimity. Strangers to those forms which 	1
specimen of his own skill in choosing the topics most 	1
spectable assembly all the proceedings in the confer- 	1
spectacles. 	1
spectators of the commotions of this turbulent year. a 	1
spect for the English queen, that foreign princes began 	1
spectful treatment ; and possessing, under an aristocra- 	1
spective engagements. Mr. Dalzel, who is undoubtedly a 	1
spect to the transactions in the reign of queen Mary. 	1
speed towards Niddrie, lord Seaton's seat in West- 	1
spiracy *. 	1
spiracy : but as I had written notes upon these passages, the 	1
spirators could not defend them against the superior 	1
spirators" of every resource, and incapable of resistance, fled 	1
spire a martial spirit, to train men to be soldiers, and 	1
spired against James the third, and who raised his son, 	1
spire him with hopes of attaining the supreme rank in a 	1
spirit among the northern nations. They knew little, 	1
spirit; and that the most original, perhaps the most 	1
spirit; and to what a different issue Melvil's report, 	1
spirited, and accustomed to command. To induce her 	1
spirit of Christianity in writing a tragedy, which gives 	1
spirit of controversy soon discovered, that without some 	1
spirit of his countrymen. At last, Robert Bruce, the 	1
spirit of that age, firm and uncomplying, would not, 	1
spirit of the province, and to keep possession of a port 	1
spirit of the Scots, and their promptness to revenge 	1
spirit them, by offering to decide the quarrel, and to 	1
spirit to observe no bounds in its respect and liberality 	1
spirit was not the characteristic of that family ; and, 	1
spirit which distinguished her family. But in her it was dovf .^S KT 	1
spirit which had begun to spread among his party b . 	1
spirit, which hitherto all the arts of policy had scarcely 	1
spised, he could never hope to form a party, which 	1
spite of the entreaties of lord Herries, Fleming, and 	1
splendid train, and brought presents from Elizabeth, 	1
splendour and presence of a king, to which the great 	1
splendour or power from the friendship of the former, 	1
splendour. The great hall of an ambitious baron was 	1
spoke of the matter to Dr. Campbell, who confirmed what 	1
spoke of translating my new volume of history ; but, as he 	1
spondence between the murderers of cardinal Beatoun and Henry the 	1
spondence with the court of England*. Elizabeth, 	1
spondence with the court of Rome, she now resolved 	1
spondence with whom, as with his other acquaintance, 	1
spondent Bullinger, an eminent reformed divine of Zurich, expresses no 	1
Spotswood, 230. 	1
spread fast upon this discovery of the king's intentions ; 	1
spreading fast throughout the nation ; and that an uni- 	1
spread the ardour of reformation, and the utmost ex- 	1
squadron to cruise in the frith of Forth. She seems, 	1
stabbed him to the heart. An action so unworthy of a 	1
stacle it would prove to their designs, they bent all 	1
stage of his malady he removed from Edinburgh to 	1
stance, however, which occurred towards the close of 	1
stance of her having one kingdom already in her pos- 	1
stance of magnificence and respect. After bidding- 	1
stance of the king's disbanding his army, at a time 	1
stances and spirit of that age. Many among the most 	1
stances from those which had formerly induced him 	1
stances of disadvantage, they conceived it possible to I56d. 	1
stances of frequent hostilities, and reciprocal injuries ; 	1
stances of his murder, and the shameful remissness in 	1
stances, the jurisdiction of that office; and extended the 	1
stance which does honour to the conduct and humanity 	1
standard against their sovereign. The reestablishing 	1
standard of truth, and upheld it with an unconquerable 	1
standards from every corner of the country through 	1
standards of elegance ; they scorn to disguise, or to lay 	1
standing, and .all his passions were still more impetu- 	1
standings, and the most improbable fictions were re- 	1
standings and to their courage ; to the former, by sup- 	1
standing the king's danger, she amused herself with 	1
standing the peace which subsisted between the two 	1
standing the splendour of his victories, and the glory of 	1
St. Andrew's, and John Erskine of Dun. 	1
stantly followed. 	1
stantly to deliver six persons of the first rank, to be 	1
statement of the sentiments of the Scottish people. 	1
State of Eu- To this account of the internal constitution of Scot- 	1
state of the evidence produced of her guilt, as, I think, leaves 	1
state of the kingdom, and to illustrate many important 	1
State Papers, 261. 263. See Append. No. III. 	1
State Trials, edit. Hargrave, i. 90. 	1
station. England was growing into reputation for naval 	1
statutes of the two universities, which, in many cases, 	1
stay d . Mary soon recovered strength enough to return 	1
stay of the ships has brought the people of this town, both men and women, 	1
steadiness, than that of any of his ancestors. And the 	1
stead of attaining power and dignity himself, saw that 	1
step. It was her interest to have proposed it early; 	1
stepped forth and told me how many friends and admirers I 	1
steps in his conduct. 	1
steps towards insinuating themselves into the queen's into favour 	1
step, the natural impetuosity of his spirit did not suffer 	1
sterity of the presbyterian system deemed it so incon- 	1
sternation. They had obtained a promise of pardon ;" xi e led 	1
Stewart, from whose life of the historian the principal 	1
Stewart informs us, that there still remain many of his 	1
stiffness which very often characterizes the epistles of 	1
still adhered to the popish church ; but, on this occa- 	1
still be at liberty to choose which of these courses she 	1
still believe, that if the protestants in this country had 	1
still called her subjects, to return into England ; and, 	1
still except, however, the friendship and good opinion of wor- 	1
still far from being complete. Under these circ urn- 	1
still more important. As it was vain to pronounce a 	1
still more important, naturally followed. The vassals 	1
still more unpopular. In order to bring the town en- 	1
still of great authority in that court. From the time of 	1
still of greater importance to the French king. The 	1
still passionately devoted to the Romish church ; and ~ 	1
still remained as distant and uncertain as ever. But, ~ 	1
still remained in the kingdom, should be demolished k ; 	1
still subsists, and which he named the ' college of jus- 	1
still the same, without any alterations in their views or 	1
stinacy. He then proceeded to repair the fortifications 	1
stipulations, with regard to the time and manner of re- 	1
Stirling, and declared not only for the political, but the 	1
Stirling, he promised likewise to obey that command. 	1
Stirling, she declared, in strong terms, her resolution 	1
stituent members of which it was composed. In all the 	1
stituted in his place his other brothers, according to 	1
stitution of our parliaments, we find a committee distin- 	1
stocracy. The nobles, for this reason, guarded against 	1
stood 11 . Truth needed only a fair hearing to be an 	1
stood confounded and at gaze ; and persevered in a si- 	1
stood forth to vindicate the rights of their country. 	1
stood, might give some weight to my representations. 	1
storm of popular insurrection, though impetuous and 	1
Stormont, and the few in this capital who have had 	1
storm which followed. 	1
stowed lands, to others she gave new titles of honour e . 	1
stowed on ecclesiastics a great proportion of the national 	1
stowed on ecclesiastics, who alone possessed the king's 	1
stowed on himself," or his ancestors, he no longer dis- 	1
stowed upon one of the regent's favourites, who seized 	1
stowing the command of the Scottish guards on a French- 	1
stow the young queen upon one of the princes of the 	1
straight afore them, and their followers in that order so hard at their backs, 	1
strained by a promise which he had made to his father : 	1
strained to retire, and the French set out from Kirk- 	1
straining the popish clergy in this point, as would ob- 	1
straint which the royal presence imposed, assembled in 	1
strances ; 	1
strances, but communicated the matter to Bothwell; 1567. 	1
strangers' 1 . By these promotions they conceived the 	1
strangers, and has always exposed them to hatred, and 	1
strangers, and remained long obscure and inconsiderable. 	1
strangers at the court of France, their eminent qualities 	1
strangers ; but that now the insolence and importunity 	1
stranger. Some of them were dismissed, and others 	1
strangers, the ancient enemies of the Scottish name, 	1
strangers to the sentiments of the nation with respect 	1
strangers to the talents which make a figure in debate, 	1
stranger to the ambitious hopes with which that young 	1
strangest accounts on that head ; which my modesty will not 	1
strated against this measure. He wished his country 	1
Strathbogie, was the last and most convenient scene 	1
streets of Edinburgh; and, being both attended with 	1
streets were covered with multitudes, whom zeal or 	1
street, where I never had an house) delayed some time the 	1
strength. 	1
strength and resources of the two contending factions; 	1
strengthens the soul in the practice of virtue. Not an 	1
strength of the adverse faction daily increased. He 	1
strength, which the regent had not been able to wrest 	1
strict grammar, we must conclude, that the queen herself elected them. 	1
strike the blow. He resolved at last to wait till his 	1
stripped gradually of those possessions which, in reward 	1
strongest terms, against any alliance with them; and to 	1
strongest terms, the crimes imputed to her ; and recri- 	1
strongest terms, their dissatisfaction with the measures 	1
strongest terms ; they, by restoring her to her ancient 	1
strong indications of those eminent qualities, which, in 	1
strongly against them, and, notwithstanding some fears 1565. 	1
strong reinforcement from France, and expected great 	1
strong temper rendered him incapable of advice. The 	1
strong terms the same arguments which Lennox had 	1
stroyed the liberties of that kingdom. But, into this 	1
stroying Murray, and of employing the power of the earl of Huntly for this 	1
struck was sudden and fatal. The artifices of Henry 	1
structed the operations of justice to the utmost. The 	1
struction of his house, and, perhaps, of his person, he 	1
struction of the English must have been inevitable. 	1
structions contained an overture, which ought to have modate her 	1
structions, either public or secret, could hardly be known. Le Croc plainly 	1
structions, the original of which still remains. Keith, 356. 2. Bedford's 	1
structions, to view matters in the light most favourable 	1
structions with reverence and attention e , and prepared 	1
struction to her views. He was lying at the point of 	1
structive; but upon its ruins the family of Hamilton 	1
struggle for liberty was violent, and the spirit of oppo- 	1
struggles for liberty and the shock of arms, not to lose 	1
struggles, he voluntarily retired to France; and, the 	1
struments of their prince's vengeance became, in a short 	1
student had voluntarily applied his attention to the 	1
studies barbarous and uninstructive ; but as the eccle- 	1
study or perusal of a great number of different tracts ; a task 	1
suaded him to recall that dishonourable promise, which 	1
suaded them of her sincerity. This belief fortified 	1
suaded the Scots to revenge the death of their king, 	1
subdue the kingdom, and to oppress its liberties, by 	1
subduing the Scots, and wreathing the yoke about their 	1
subjected to a capital punishment, in the same manner 	1
subjected to a foreign yoke. Edward was artful, brave, 	1
subjection. The latter and more rigorous method of 	1
subject of France. By this choice they were delivered ~~ 	1
subjects. 	1
subjects, and fomented all the dissensions and troubles 	1
subjects, and solicited for her liberty, with a warmth 	1
subjects as fathers or as equals, without distrust, and 	1
subjects could obtain audience without his permission ; 	1
subjects for the king's glory, that he was followed by 	1
subjects. The clergy had, hitherto, with great address, 	1
subjects to an amicable accommodation, so she was still 	1
subjects to their sovereign. Glencairn added, that 	1
subjects were numerous, active, and warlike, lovers of 	1
subject to the same burthen. Parliaments did not 	1
subject, with great boldness and surprising success. 	1
submission of the people, were at no pains either to 	1
submission, was the patron and restorer of this scheme 	1
submit. 	1
submitted to every condition which the sovereign whom 	1
submitted to his power. By such an improvement of 	1
submitted, without reluctance, to the legal and ancient 	1
submitting my cause to a judicial trial, acknowledge 	1
subsequent period renders it necessary to explain his 	1
subsidy of eight thousand crowns z . Though Murray 	1
succeeded a species of splendid idolatry, nearly resem- 	1
Succeeding historians have followed these guides al- 	1
succeeds to se rve, that, on the seventeenth of November, one thou- 	1
success. But these qualities were deeply tinctured with 	1
successful. 	1
success. His sagacity and penetration in civil affairs 	1
success in the parliament, 'which was then about to 	1
success in the present juncture, when all things were 	1
succession 2 . 	1
succession, and furnished his rival with the only argu- 	1
succession. She was the daughter of Margaret, the 	1
successive ages, it arrived at last to a degree of perfec- 	1
successively of their acquisitions, and reduced to a state 	1
success. Nothing, therefore, remained, but, by one 	1
successor, Henry the second, was not neglectful of the 	1
success, secret negotiations, which increased the num- 	1
success which always accompanies a bold and popular 	1
such a bold accusation had been preferred against 	1
such a conclusion of the whole appears, at first sight, 	1
Such a decision, though they had reason to expect it, 	1
Such a dissension had subsisted between the house 	1
such a length, that, in the end, the party dwindled to 	1
such ample authority, to pursue them with more vigour 	1
Such an amendment, however, did not suit the views 1561. 	1
such an immense store of original papers for illustrat- 	1
such an increase of the royal power, and, thereby, se- 	1
such an odious crime, together with the denunciations 	1
such a project," says his biographer, " occur in letters 	1
Such a quick succession of incidents, so singular and 	1
such as were present with the utmost consternation. 	1
such atrocious crimes, could be no longer the object of 	1
such a work, to move in the house of peers, that he 	1
such behaviour deservedly exposed him. 	1
such cabals as would justify the using her with greater 	1
such direction, alarmed the Scottish malecontents with 	1
such fortunate occurrence. Nor would the alteration 	1
such laws, as he deemed necessary for extending his 	1
Such moderation seems hardly to be compatible with 	1
such neglect of her own dignity, she mentioned the earl 	1
such numbers, as soon enabled the queen to set the 	1
such of their preachers as were most remarkable for 	1
such of the nobles as secretly disapproved the match, 	1
such practices and intelligences as she had in former times : 	1
such rapid changes, confusion was unavoidable; and 	1
such reinforcements from France, as would insure the 	1
such retinue as might endanger his command of the 	1
such sudden changes were then so common, as to be 	1
Such was the famous John Knox, who, with better qua- 	1
Such were the efforts of our kings towards reducing 	1
sudden change of his measures ; and, though he en- 	1
sudden or formidable effect. The ardent and impetuous 	1
sudden start of resentment, without charging him with any premeditated 	1
sudden the queen issued a proclamation, restoring the 	1
sued; on what terms is not known. But the king's jea- 	1
sued some &amp; . 	1
suffer any closer union of their country with France ; 	1
suffered at Cambridge. 	1
suffered, might excite murmurs and apprehensions, but 	1
suffered no considerable interruption. A thick and 	1
suffered their conduct to be misconstrued, and had murder - 	1
suffered the punishment due to their crimes ; and, by 	1
suffered the title by which she held the crown to re- 	1
suffered the wrong was the only person who had a right 	1
sufferings had removed or diminished the prejudices of 	1
suffer the king's resentment to abate. Morton, who 	1
sufficient, a proclamation was issued, forbidding any 	1
sufficient for the safety and honour of their country, the 	1
sufficient to excuse me for not taking an earlier notice of 	1
suggest a very pleasing idea of the society which you enjoy at 	1
suirectLn 1 " n ^ s representations ; he, having been carried a prisoner 	1
suitable to her own dignity, and the respect with which 	1
suitable to justice, to humanity, or to their own dignity. 	1
suited the occasion, and which was necessary for the 	1
suited the present temper of her mind, and induced 	1
suited to their predominant passion : while the friends 	1
suit, in his own name, in the spiritual court of the arch- 	1
suit. Suspicion, indolence, immoderate attachment to 	1
suit the temper of a bigoted court, intent, at that junc- 	1
sullen and disrespectful silence of the people when the 	1
sult, and not a single man suffered death . 	1
sulted foreign princes, while they concealed it from 	1
sum allotted for the maintenance of a national church, 	1
suming guests. The symptoms of alienation were soon 	1
summoned him to appear before her upon a short warn- 	1
summon Lennox to be present, is dated on the twenty-ninth. Anders. 	1
sumption of innocence in the prisoner. Yet as Mary's was 	1
sumptive evidence for this, arising from the memorial mentioned by Burnet, 	1
superior authority, assembled his own followers, and 	1
superior or judge, and their impatient spirit would sel- 	1
superior species ; they were neither subject to the same 	1
superior to that of all other subjects, and had placed 	1
superstition and profuseness, to raise the clergy from 	1
superstition had erected in times' of darkness, began to 	1
superstition inspires into a barbarous people. Many 	1
superstition, were present in this parliament. But, dur- 	1
superstitious fears alarmed the court of Spain. France 	1
supplied them with a numerous band of faithful and 	1
supply me with as many as you can, and direct me to any 	1
supported by those who favoured the reformation, and 	1
supported either with money, or fed with hopes, by 	1
supporting it was formed, and signed by so many per- 1567. 	1
support of some disaffected barons among the Scots, 	1
support of the whole popish faction, to hold by force 	1
supports, made it easy, in the following reign, to over- 	1
supposed to imply the subjection of their whole king- 	1
supposes that the discord between the king and queen was the cause of 	1
supposititious treaties and charters ; are the proofs on 	1
suppositos cineri doloso. When even those ashes will 	1
suppressing religious opinions known in that age, or 	1
suppressing the reformation throughout all Europe f . 	1
suppression of the monasteries, not only changed the 	1
suppress the sentiments and indignation of the people. 	1
supreme council in his favour. Such a violent and un- 	1
supreme council of the kingdom. At a time when the 	1
supreme direction of this, as well as of all other affairs, 	1
supreme power still remaining in his hands, he employed 	1
supreme power to continue in the hands of an ambitious 	1
sure all along in doing ill offices to the queen of Scots ; 	1
sure, and both these gratifications I have the pleasure of 	1
sure ; and would still contribute, to the utmost of his 	1
sure imaginary, was believed to be real. An artificial 	1
sure in being the only man in England, during some 	1
sure of victory ; and, conscious of this advantage, the 	1
sures for seizing Darnly, and carrying him a prisoner 	1
sures for the publication of this work. It appeared on 	1
sure, that reputation and popularity which had smoothed 	1
sure there is no reply to that; and we must swallow 	1
sure which had been unhappily so much misunder- 	1
sure, which the public safety, and the preservation of 	1
sure, which would have restored her to her kingdom 	1
surmises, could be produced by his accusers. For this 	1
surmounted the dangers that obstructed her escape, 	1
surprise at this unexpected manner of evading her re- 	1
surprised at the gay and childish levity Hume dis- 	1
surprise, however, is felt in learning that so young a 	1
surprise the queen's party, and, by one sudden and"" 	1
surprising the protestant leaders, before they could as- 	1
surprising to the greater part of the English commis- 	1
surrection was not the effect of any concert, or previous 	1
surrender. a s his prisoners, transported them into France. The 	1
surrendered, he was one of the small band who repaired 	1
surrender, his followers dispersed or cut in pieces the 	1
surrendering every thing for which the Scottish nation 	1
surrender the strong castle of Dumbarton &gt; which he 	1
survived the fatal battle of Flowden, thwarted all his 	1
sury, and the sums appropriated for the subsistence of 	1
suspected of piracy." Hardw. State Papers, i. 176. Castelnau, who ac- 	1
suspected to be the author of it; and, till that were 	1
suspended the execution of this part of his design, for 	1
suspend, for some time, the prosecution of her title to 	1
suspicions of his guilt ; divorced from his wife, on pre- 	1
suspicion was entertained, 391. Melvil, in a conversation with the queen, 	1
suspicious of all their designs. Amidst the shock which 	1
suspicious same complaints of the increase of idolatry, the same 	1
swayed with the greater number. 	1
swered, that it was with reluctance admission into the 	1
sword had won from the enemy. Great acquisitions 	1
swords all broad and thin, of exceeding good temper, and universally so 	1
sword was taken out of private hands, and committed 	1
Sympathy with a sovereign in distress seems, for a mo- 	1
symptom of implacable hatred '. 	1
synod of the clergy, which was soon to convene at 	1
system. 	1
system, and breathed too much of a pacific and mode- 	1
systematic, and pursued with greater constancy and 	1
system deserve to be explained. 	1
system of religion and government which was now intro- 	1
system of religion was every where overthrown, and 	1
system of superstition, weakened the firmest founda- 	1
system, -which awakened the indignation of the reform- 	1
T566. While she resided in this place, her attention was 	1
table person will excuse you. 	1
tablished in almost every civilized nation, yet England 	1
tachment to him, Mary remembered the inconvenien- 	1
tachment to intercept a convoy of provisions which was 	1
tachment to Leicester, and while he was still in the very 	1
tachment to popery ; but his indignation on account of 	1
tacked it; the Norwegians sailed with armed boats to 	1
tage. At the same tune she required them, on pain 	1
tagenet, the French had been accustomed to embarrass 	1
tage of speaking their own language, and relating their own 	1
tageous for the crown, as if the prince had had the sole nomination of them. 	1
tageous situation he waited the approach of the enemy, 	1
tage over Mary which the countess of Lennox enjoyed. 	1
tages, approached, and the regent was still undeter- 	1
tages they would reap, by the concurrence of such an 	1
tages towards the knowledge of human nature. We 	1
tage to employ this appearance of violence. It afforded 	1
tage to himself, than to leave them exposed to danger. 	1
tage, were not afraid to offend ; arid the difficulty of 	1
tagonist. Wherever I am satisfied that I have fallen into 	1
tain . 	1
tain a more favourable audience than formerly, and 	1
tained by princes ; and all her other qualities were ren- 	1
tained by them out of fear that Bothwell might sink in his hopes, and be- 	1
tained most of their ancient privileges and possessions, 	1
tained, occasioned a general alarm. Though Dunbar 	1
tained that Mary's affection for Bothwell was still un- 	1
tained that satisfaction which the low and ignorant feel 	1
tained their original fiefs undivided ; the latter were the 	1
tain even a dependent crown, invited him first to seize, 	1
tain for them an ample remission of all their crimes, 	1
tain his former influence over her councils. He again 	1
taining a new conquest, as well as the danger of being 	1
taining this body of men, rendered them more and more 	1
tain in his most hardy and dangerous enterprises. It 	1
tain intelligence of this was brought him, while he lay 	1
tainly be ranked in the highest historical class; and for my 	1
tainment, discovers the sentiments of her allies with 	1
tainment of perfection in the various careers of human 	1
tain of Mary's designs, while she had power in her 	1
tains of Northumberland; but they were at length 	1
take ; and almost every person of distinction^ who was 	1
take arms in their own defence. 	1
take arms which subjects run to defend a mild and popular ad- 	1
take away his life by poison, fled from court, and, re- 	1
take care your encouragement should be proportioned 	1
take in your narration. But there came to me a man this 	1
take it with safety, would have been unpardonable im- 	1
taken, and to divert him from it. In spite, however, 	1
taken arms not against the queen, but against the mur- 	1
taken in the battle of Langside, the spirit and strength 	1
taken into the account. 	1
take notice of a circumstance unobserved by contem- 	1
taken the liberty to handle rather roughly some miser- 	1
take the alarm. He considered Lennox as the ancient 	1
take. the greatest reverence, they assembled all the peers, 	1
take this desperate step 1 ". And as this accusation 	1
TALBOYS AND WHEELER, OXFORD. 	1
talents of Dr. Robertson were not confined to the his- 	1
tal to herself, as his return could not fail of reviving 	1
tance from' England, and, by supporting the congre- 	1
tance, seemed to be invested with majesty and power, ^hiclfli 	1
tant leaders deserve, on this occasion, the praise both 	1
tant n , with that minute accuracy which Elizabeth's mi- 	1
tant subjects, and to persuade her to throw herself 	1
tar, breathe nothing but incense, and tread on nothing but 	1
targets, and covered with the bodies of the slain. Above 	1
taries nor conspirators were confronted with Mary ; but you 	1
tarily, as they had been required, or were brought thither by force." This 	1
taste for such pleasures, as afterwards occupied and 	1
tated the execution of his favourite plan. On the other 	1
tated their own country into the utmost danger. The 	1
tated the operations of their own forces by land. 	1
tates, throughout the kingdom, held of the church ; 	1
tation, and it was in no case the practice. The crown could 	1
tation, by this unhappy quarrel. It was, on both sides, 	1
tation! I expected that your manner of treating me 	1
tation, of favourite ministers. Her choice could not 	1
tations of her subjects, had extorted, or might extort 	1
tation to their cause. Maitiand had early applied to 	1
taught, by this example, again to reverence the sacra- 	1
taught him suppleness of spirit and insinuating man- 	1
t Du Cange, voc. curia. 	1
teach wisdom, often sets out with retailing fictions and 	1
tear from the king, in whose arms he took shelter, and, 	1
te be the object of attention and intrigue. Though j^ "*^ 	1
tected either by the king of France, or of England, 	1
tect from every injury ; the administration of justice 	1
tection against every court, civil or ecclesiastical, that 	1
tection of the earl of Bedford, warden of the marches. 	1
tection of the English, it was to be feared that they 	1
tector had it now in his power to become master of a 	1
tect the reformed doctrine. They had even prevailed 	1
tect those who were embarked in k. 	1
teemed preferable to that of Elizabeth. Among the 	1
teen editions were published in the author's lifetime. 	1
teen persons undertook to surprise his castle, and to 	1
teenth century, John Major and Hector Boethius pub- 	1
teen, to set himself at their head, they openly declared 	1
tel -houses, cast down or burnt 192 	1
telnau into Scotland, to offer her in marriage the duke 	1
tember, 1572. He was then sent into Scotland. It there 	1
tember, 1721, according to the old style, at Borthwick, 	1
temning the authority of an infant prince, almost openly 	1
temper of the nation, this measure was imputed wholly 	1
temper which both houses of parliament discovered on parliament. 	1
temper, with which she had lately been seized, having 	1
temporary historians, there are violent presumptions of 	1
temporary writers, to whatever faction they belong, 	1
tempt, and himself and family with the greatest rigour. 	1
tempted ; and the prudence of the attempt was suffi- 	1
tempted in vain. Lewis the eleventh of France, the 	1
tempted to assault Leith; but the French beat them 	1
tempted to excite them to invade England. But, as 	1
tempted to seize it, as fallen to himself by the rebellion 	1
tempt. It was not the temper of the man, or the spirit 	1
tempt. Nor was it his exorbitant power alone which 	1
tempt of his authority. Scarcity of provisions, and the 	1
tempt of the people, often held a place of power and 	1
tempt to dissemble, though I cannot easily express, the 	1
tem with regard to Scottish affairs. Among proposi- 	1
tenance of preachers m . A petition, craving redress of 	1
tenancing those who rebel against their lawful prince. 	1
tence of being confined to London, by the attention 1562. 	1
tence of his own authority. After several unsuccessful 	1
tence of outlawry. It was pronounced on many occa- 	1
tence or by secret violence, but that she should be 	1
tences frivolous or indecent ; and, after all this, instead 	1
tence, without delay; whether the queen should be 	1
tendants was instantly despatched into Scotland, with 	1
tended, appears from a remarkable transaction in the parliament held in 	1
tended, had agreed to convey the prince, her son, into 	1
tended, had been screened from the pursuits of justice 	1
tended his arms, obliged the young king to retire to 	1
tended the elector palatine, was commanded to inquire 	1
tended to fortify Leith and keep possession of it ; but, after mature delibera- 	1
tended to prove the antiquity or freedom of the king- 	1
tended trial, on condition the preachers and their re- 	1
tended with all the success which his most sanguine ]j ot h w ell 	1
tended, would make good what he alleged. The en- 	1
tendency and progress of his opinions with the utmost 	1
tenderness to her husband, that though she never had the small-pox herself, 	1
tender sentiments; and, while these were yet warm, 	1
tending monarchs into equal scales, and, by the union 	1
tending to hearken to some overtures, which she made 1568. 	1
tend their own prerogative, nor enable the commons to 	1
tend to dispose of the person of their sovereign, or to 	1
tened, at first, to Henry's proposal, and consented to 	1
tensions in Scotland. An unexpected calamity that 	1
tensions of a foreigner and of a papist. 	1
tensions of the Scottish queen in opposition to him. 	1
tensions to intrigues, that spirit which appeared in the parliament 	1
tensive, and their adherents numerous. They were 	1
tensive, under two long and feeble minorities, and 	1
ten thousand men fell on this day, one of the most fatal 	1
tention. As these assemblies were composed chiefly H^errt. 1 "" 	1
tention. Full of these expectations, they advanced ra- October 6. 	1
tentiorum juniorem oppressit; et totum regnum fuit unum latrocinium; 	1
tents. An unusual tax was imposed on the boroughs 	1
tents of it were always produced by the party, as the 	1
tent, the immoderate ambition of his two brothers, and 	1
terbalance the contempt, and even infamy, to which he 	1
ter ; but they appear to be equally removed from truth. 	1
tered at York. He was then raady to return into Scot- 	1
tered into a new and stricter confederacy with France. 	1
tered on the work of destruction. The house of the 	1
tered Scotland, at the head of a mighty army. Many 	1
tered Scotland, at the head of eighteen thousand men ; 	1
terest ; and was carried on under the influence of na- 	1
terest as Dr. Robertson himself. Voltaire acknow- 	1
terest of their order. The reuniting the possessions of 	1
ter for these counsellors to have found out a distinction, 	1
ter, having been inserted merely to amuse the congre- 	1
terials for writing his ' Martyre de Marie,' affirms, that the queen intended 	1
teries, they, in a few hours, laid those sumptuous fa- 	1
ter in making a more diligent inquiry than ever I have done 	1
terity ; and with respect to matters of the greatest cu- 	1
terity to allay it. 	1
terly unacquainted. The designs he had formed upon 	1
terminate this controversy, neither Edward nor the 	1
termination ; and no event in that age excited stronger 	1
termined her choice, to Castelnau, the French ambassa- 	1
terms as plainly unravelled her original intention in 	1
terms. The duke promised to acknowledge the au- 	1
terms, the injuries which she had suffered from her the manner 	1
terms to express her concern for the safety and wel- 	1
ter of lord Erskine ; and, as that amorous monarch had 	1
ter of religion y ." The vigilant zeal of the preachers 	1
ter of that princess. Notwithstanding all the great 	1
ter others from courting that dangerous preeminence. 	1
terous application of those talents, she had acquired a 	1
terous courtier, we may be well assured, did not em- 	1
terous management of the queen, but chiefly to the 	1
terposed at her desire. After keeping the field two 	1
terpreted to be new marks of Mar's rancour, and aug- 	1
terprise of consequence ; and obliged them to exhaust 	1
territories, vassals to the king of England. The Eng- 	1
ters are in the French language. I immediately concluded 	1
ters durst not urge her to advance one step farther than she herself chose to 	1
ter's education, and the administration of affairs in her 	1
ters full of expressions of kindness and condolence. 	1
ters of his son, Edward the sixth, cast them off alto- 	1
ters of mere ceremony alone ; he congratulated the 	1
tertained not the least suspicion of the intrigue which 	1
ter; their own address and good policy merited both. 	1
tervals, I hope to repeat my visits to England ; but no change 	1
ter which she received from the pope, after expressing 	1
ter, with a powerful army, conducted him towards Scot- 	1
tery, and address, he, at length, prevailed to have the 	1
testable. But in that age, the order of succession was 	1
testable proof of her rashness, if not of her guilt. 	1
testament is still extant, and not the least doubt can be 	1
testant clergyman to be her chaplain; heard him 	1
testant clergy, notwithstanding many discouragements, 	1
testant clergy p . 	1
testant counsellors, had found means to hold a danger- 	1
testant preachers enjoyed an interval of tranquillity, 	1
testant preachers in the kingdom to a court of justice, 	1
testant religion, they demanded that Mary herself 	1
testants, but the very men who, during the late com- 	1
testants ; they, moreover, gave the sanction of their ap- 	1
tested by posterity, Elizabeth resolved now to imitate. 	1
testified against the design ; the small number of the 	1
testimony of Melvil, 112; although Buchanan, p. 341, and Knox, p. 377, 	1
testine commotions might arise. Amidst these, Mary 	1
testing, that it was with the utmost reluctance he under- being acces- 	1
T Good. ii. 313. Carte, iii. 478. 	1
than a century, on account of the disputed titles of 	1
than active; oppressive in domestic government, and 	1
than a declaration of her own and of her subjects' gra- 	1
than all these, and attended with more success. Throk- 	1
than any she had formerly taken. But though none of 	1
than a philosopher ; in his book, De Genituris, we find a calculation of the 	1
than conquered them, they erected a strong wall be- 	1
than ever ; and Lennox, who could not expect that his 	1
than ever. Instead of obeying the queen regent, who 	1
than five thousand men ; the gates of every town were 	1
than I apprehended. For he told Strahan, who thence sus- 	1
than in a squire, and more meritorious in a king than 	1
than, in such an under-hand artificial manner, to betray their constituents, 	1
than in the other; England led the way in all these 	1
than James's. 	1
than mere matter of ceremony. Randolph urged Mary, 	1
than produce the trite observations concerning the in- 	1
than simply to give, or to refuse, their assent to the bills 	1
than their primate 6 . 	1
than the irresistible power of youth and beauty over a 	1
than the persons who committed it during the heat and 	1
than they had reason to dread injury and diminution 	1
than this overture. They saw at once all the advan- 	1
than throw herself into the hands of an enemy, from 	1
than to close, the breach. The formal offices of friend- 	1
than to seize it openly, and by force of arms. 	1
than unbounded. They flattered themselves, that a 	1
than was usual in times of greatest tranquillity. Keith, 230. 3. There re- 	1
that a French garrison should not be introduced into 	1
that, after the rage and havoc of the present storm, 	1
that age could bear, and indulging irregular passions, 	1
that age, had exhausted all the money which a country, 	1
that age justified the most desperate course which he 	1
that age required, a much longer interval, it appears 	1
that all Europe waited with solicitude for Mary's de- 	1
that an act of parliament was passed on purpose to restrain or moderate it. 	1
that any man's enemies would contribute towards raising him to such high 	1
that any of the party escaped being cut in pieces. 	1
that appearance could be preserved, none of the other 	1
that aspersion, they promised her a reception suitable 	1
that assistance which it becomes you, more than any 	1
that, as time advances, and the sphere of human know- 	1
that author's place would not be so high among their 	1
that body to be unprecedented and presumptuous. 	1
that bold design, which he soon after put in execution ; 1566. 	1
that bold importunity which is so little acceptable to 	1
that both assented to this strange demand, and Gilbert 	1
that, by lending their aid to strip churchmen of their 	1
that, by the time of the reformation, little less than one 	1
that consanguinity, which was at first in a great mea- 	1
that could be dangerous. 	1
that country ; and, residing sometimes in England, some- 	1
that country, with regard to private inheritances, " who- 	1
that court adopted. 	1
that crime, and produced papers, which,, as he pre- 	1
that departed farthest from the practice of the Romish 	1
that disingenuous craft which had been employed to 	1
that Dr. Robertson had no reason to complain of the 	1
that, during the queen's absence, the administration of 	1
that, either to Frenchman or Englishman, I shall ever speak 	1
that he could attack them, with great advantage, in 	1
that he could hardly walk, or bear the weight of his own 	1
that he had greater reason to apprehend danger, than 	1
that he had recourse to a measure no less violent than 	1
that he had sold his History of Scotland at a moderate 	1
that he hoped to set such persons about her as" (Here the 	1
that he owed his passage through the northern coun- 	1
that her confidence in Rizio concealed any thing criminal, is in itself a suf- 	1
that he resolved to return by the same gate through 	1
that he should assume the government, and that eight 	1
that high office; and of these, forty-three had been 	1
that if he would not conform himself to her will, and follow 	1
that I had never parted with that Lixivium, in case I should 	1
that, in a manner consistent with the ideas of the 	1
that ingenious people to the great secret of modern po- 	1
that, in order to preserve their own religion and liber- 	1
that integrity which should prevail, in all transactions 	1
that, in this particular, their conduct could ill bear 	1
that intrigue d . She promised, if the Scottish queen's 	1
that I perceive nothing sinful or inconsistent with the 	1
that it is impossible to believe her sincere in this part 	1
that it soon became a matter of chief attention to all 	1
that it surpasses in variety and entertainment at least the 	1
that it was in her power to make it lean to either side. 	1
that it was not only vain to expect any redress of their 	1
that it will be beneficial to the work itself. I have been 	1
that I was appointed some time ago one of the lords of trade ; 	1
that kind were not uncommon. His confidence in his 	1
that kingdom 1 . But they hoped to be able to defend 	1
that kingdom an useful ally to France, which, by a 	1
that life itself might come to an end*. 	1
that little suited the dignity of her mind and the eleva- 	1
that manner which alone she thought acceptable to 	1
that Mary could be admitted, with any decency, into 	1
that Mary owed her life to her interposition, pigges's Compl. Amb. 14, 	1
that message whereby Mary had signified her willing- 	1
that minister. He espoused, for this reason, the cause 	1
that nature and reason teach every prince to defend 	1
that neglect was still more intolerable to the nobles than 	1
that neither splendour of birth, nor eminence in station, 	1
that nobleman. 	1
that now seemed devoted to destruction. They had 	1
that office, and requiring him to be answerable to the abbot for his exercise 	1
that of her adversaries lost by suppressing this capital 1668. 	1
that of Lauder, for the daring encroachments of the 	1
that of Mar fell to him by inheritance. The patience 	1
that of the latter, as the name implies, royal, and almost 	1
that of the Stewarts. Had I been prudent, I should have 	1
that, on the one hand, the protestants should open the 	1
that part of them which is connected with my subject. 	1
that party, and the person whose activity and ability 	1
that period, continued above a year and an half". 	1
that period, grew every day bolder and more universal. 	1
that pur- an( l delicacy, the princes of Lorrain made choice of 	1
that purpose, obtained an act, by which he was em- 	1
that purpose, to exclude such as were averse from his 	1
that recommended by the reformers introduced in its 	1
that retreat, as much repose, and even happiness, as is con- 	1
that rule. The crown of that kingdom having once 	1
that Scotch national troops were not Frenchmen and foreign- 	1
that seem to multiply before the hour of publication, may 	1
that she gave her consent to marry the husband of another woman ; and 	1
that she got into a fisherboat, and, with about twenty May 16. 	1
that she has got a habit of industry ; and would continue, if I 	1
that she might lay before her the injuries which she 	1
that she should resign the crown to her son, and, re- 	1
that strikes us is the king. And when we are told that 	1
that the ambition of the prior aspired beyond the con- 	1
that the calling to their assistance a people more power- 	1
that the conference in England would terminate to her 	1
that the copies would be shipped for Scotland in two days, 	1
that the dangers, the achievements, and the views of 	1
that their opposition would irritate their adversaries, 	1
that the king and queen would soon be at leisure to 1560. 	1
That the king's suspicions were strong, is likewise evident from the paper 	1
that the parliament, or rather the nation, violated the 	1
that the party might probably be involved in great 	1
that the protection granted by this law is no longer to be regarded as tem- 	1
that the queen, perceiving all attempts to engage them 	1
that the Scottish nobles had been enabled to take the 	1
that these officers should, upon all occasions, be ready 	1
that the testament of Henry the eighth, whereby he 	1
that the whole narration of Mary's trial must be wrote over 	1
that they could not be justified h . 	1
that they did not appear in that light to the nation, 	1
that they merited all the zeal with which the reformers 	1
that they put themselves out of breath, and left the 	1
that this general dissatisfaction of his people might en- 	1
that this sanction should not be deemed any acknow- 	1
that this should by parliament in Scotland, etc. surrender unto the queen's 	1
that this supposition is destroyed by the direct testimony of the queen her- 	1
that Throkmorton made no progress in his negotiations 	1
that time, all public writs were issued, and the govern- 	1
that time, a numerous and active party, openly espoused 	1
that time. " But what after I learned, specially touching their order, their 	1
that time, by their zeal and numbers, and exasperated 	1
that time, induce the whole nation to declare against the 	1
that time Mary wanted power, and seems to have had no inclination to com- 	1
that time, one by Mary herself, in a letter to the archbishop of Glasgow : 	1
that time, the town of greatest importance on the Scot- small sum 	1
That vast and curious collection of papers relating 	1
that very night. This example was followed by many; 	1
That very power which, with liberal and unsuspicious 	1
that were done, no change would be made in her pre- 	1
that whatever was done there, should be held to be 	1
that which had been long established. The motives 	1
that which he is alleged to have formed against the queen herself, are ever 	1
That which they enjoyed at present was very precari- 	1
that while she lay under the imputation of a crime so 	1
that you had not read the manuscripts, but had taken it on 	1
THE 	7
the 20th and the other on the 21st of December, are found in Keith, 562. 	1
the abandoning of whom to the mercy of the French, 	1
the abbe Prevot, celebrated for the Memoires d'un Homme 	1
the abbey and town of Arbroath, being the cardinal's, and all the other 	1
the abbey of Dundrenan in Galloway, full sixty Scot- 	1
the accomplishment of the treaty. The regent saw 	1
The account it gives of the different inroads, or ' forrays,' as they are called, 	1
the accounts of the reformers, confirmed by several 	1
The accusation itself was conceived in the strongest 	1
The active policy of pope Pius the fourth, and the zeal 	1
The act of deprivation, and a letter from the lords of 	1
the act of forfeiture. Epist. Reg. Scot. ii. 350. 361. 	1
the act of oblivion, mentioned in the treaty of Edin- 	1
the adjacent country. This insult roused the fiery 	1
the administration out of his hands, advanced the pre- 	1
the advantage of ground on his side. The Scottish 	1
The advantage she had gained over them did not 	1
the advantages which might be derived from their ge- 	1
The affection which Mary there expresses for Both- 	1
the age. 	1
the altercations and mutual reproaches of the two par- 	1
the ambassador 1 ". 	1
the ambiguous and artful expressions in that treaty 	1
the ambition of the house of Lorrain was called off, 	1
the ancient alliance with France, to contract a new one 	1
the ancient animosity between him and the house of 	1
the ancient form b . Instead of bishops, he proposed 	1
the ancient rolls, that, during times of tranquillity, few 	1
the appearance of a leader, whose high quality and 	1
the approaching festival of Easter according to the 	1
The archbishopric of St. Andrew's was bestowed by 	1
the ardour and boldness with which he pursued his 	1
the ardour and expectations even of Knox himself. 	1
the ardour with which she pursued Murray and his 	1
the arguments of the two contending parties, whatever 	1
the aristocracy lost no ground under his administration. 	1
the aristocracy, than were ever obtained by any former 	1
the aristocratical form of government established among 	1
the arms of England. Elizabeth would be ready to af- 	1
the arrival of an army so powerful as the zeal of their 	1
the arrival of a powerful army from the continent. The a peace, 	1
the arrival of new reinforcements. Slight and unfinish- 	1
the article in dispute, would have lost that rank which 	1
the artifice of Elizabeth's conduct, and saw what a 	1
the art of negotiating under three successive monarchs. 1560. 	1
the arts of government, she was weak enough to com- 	1
the aspersions which blemished her character. This 	1
the assassins, in the general sentence of condemnation : odious as the crime 	1
The assemblies of the church were not unconcerned Church 	1
The assembly of the church, which sat at the same 	1
the assistance which was promised him towards de- 	1
The at- governments for destruction. Towards the end of the 	1
theatre of the war, to crush the designs of the princes 	1
the attack ; but, on the first motion of the enemy, they 	1
the authority of laws little known or regarded, near 	1
the authority of the commissaries, and had given them 	1
the authors of all the king's violent measures, they 	1
the banditti, exposed to the rigour of the season, and 	1
the barons, in which they were disappointed or pe- 	1
the battle, sir John Gordon was beheaded at Aber- 	1
The beauty and gracefulness of her person drew uni- 	1
the benefit of this treaty, and to reserve them for that 	1
the besieged in their sally was owing entirely to the 	1
the best and fullest vindication of her innocence y . 	1
the best judges, that the spirit and elegance of the composi- 	1
the best place in the world ? I could here live in great abund- 	1
the better. Hereto every man his pike, and a great kercher wrapped twice 	1
The bigotry of her clergy could scarce keep pace with 	1
the bigotry of Mary of England, hastened the subver- 	1
the bill which was to be moved in parliament, for re- 	1
the body of the nobility. Those who were now the in- 	1
the book to palliate and veil the enormities of the 	1
the borderers. It does not appear that the queen was attended by any con- 	1
the boundaries of their empire. Adrian, on account of 	1
the branches, he struck directly at the root of popery, 	1
the bravery but with the skill of veterans. The latter, 	1
The breach between them became every day more 	1
The breach The breach between Mary and her husband was not 	1
the camp of Fala would have been as remarkable as 	1
the capacity of their leaders been, in any degree, equal 	1
the cardinal of Lorrain, had obtained the abbeys of 	1
the cardinal of Lorrain, not to restore the leaders of 	1
the cardinal's apartment, they awakened his numerous 	1
the cardinal, they were, in the sequel, powerfully sup- 	1
the care of the earl of Mar. The fidelity and loyalty 	1
The castle of Edinburgh, however, was a place of so 	1
the castle of St. Andrew's, soon made his escape out of 	1
the castle, of which he was governor. The discontent 	1
the castle, which, from that time, was entirely under 	1
the catholic religion; the settling the order of suc- 	1
the censures of the people. While the reformers, by 	1
The ceremony of witnessing the prince's baptism was Elizabeth 	1
The character of the earl of Arran was, in almost Character of 	1
the character of those who directed Mary's councils at that time, will hardly 	1
the charge has been often repeated since. But, according to Mary's own 	1
the charms of whose appearance and behaviour she 	1
The charm which had at first attached the queen to The queen's 	1
the chief management of affairs would be committed to 	1
the Christian church, as established in the Roman em- 	1
the church. 	1
the church and kingdom. They were willing, perhaps, 	1
the church, as threw great weight into the scale of the 	1
the church, established so many ages. In reforming the doctrine 	1
the church of her palace. Appendix, No. XX. Every consideration should 	1
the church of Scotland, and was too wise to disdain 	1
the church of Scotland. As this court was the most 	1
the church, such an increase of power must have fol- 	1
the church to the crown, or the bestowing them on the 	1
the church was destroyed, and an equality established 	1
The citizens of Glasgow were well affected to the 	1
the civil constitution are produced, by the lords of the 	1
The civil transactions in Scotland are better known James the 	1
the civil wars which had desolated England for more 	1
The clcr^v 	1
The clergy offered to contribute a great sum towards 	1
the clergy went to witness the first representation of 	1
the clergy were diverted into other channels. The 	1
The cold reception of the archbishop of St. Andrew's 	1
the colonies left to themselves could not have made 	1
the commander of the French troops, who possessed 	1
the command of his followers, who were rising in arms 	1
the common boundaries of subjection, and their minds 	1
the common danger called on the whole order to unite, 	1
the common remedy against the disorders of a minority, 	1
the commons, and gave them a weight in the legisla- 	1
the conclusion of her daughter's marriage with the dau- 	1
The concurrence of the protestants with the queen Continues 	1
the concurrence of the rest, was deemed by many of 	1
the conditions she obtained for her allies, the Scots, 	1
The conduct of George, the present earl, during the 	1
the conduct of the Scottish queen, and the misfortunes 	1
the confederacy, and, at their desire, he now returned. 	1
the confederacy was at first formed ; and after punish- 	1
the confederates f . 	1
The conference, however, was opened with much Complaint 	1
The confer- The conference had, hitherto, been conducted in a 	1
the confidence of his people, by many wise laws, tend- 	1
the congregation, and was soon to be followed by a 	1
the congregation to the queen regent, are still extant f . 	1
the congregation, who had hitherto drawn from thence 	1
the congregation, who had retreated to the eastern 	1
the congre- wna t course they should hold, now that their own re- 	1
the connivance of collectors, greatly diminished the 	1
the consciousness of a bad cause, afforded matter of 	1
the consequence of giving the smallest degree of en- 	1
the consternation which a blow so unexpected occa- 	1
the constitution pointed out : and here every Scotsman 	1
the contemporary historians, acquired no less sway over 	1
the contradiction of historians and the defectiveness of 	1
The contrariety of such observances to the spirit of 	1
the countenance of the regent, the reformation made 	1
the countess of Argyll, Rizio, and a few other persons, 	1
the countess of Northumberland, wandering for some 	1
the count of Sancerre for a part of these lands, which held of that noble- 	1
the country were barren and uncultivated; and, in con- 	1
the court 	1
the court, had a right to elect the lords of articles, it was equally advan- 	1
the court in parliament, or mention of any difficulty in 	1
the court of France, nor the pursuits of ambition which 	1
the court of Rome f . 	1
the court of session, appointed other judges called 	1
the credulous spirit of her husband, no less flexible on 	1
The crowd of expectants ceased to court his patronage, 	1
the crown. Accidental events concurred with political 	1
the crown ; and the concurrence of almost all the Scot- 	1
the crown of France, declaring all promises to the con- 	1
the crown. These seem to have been the views of both 	1
the crown, to ratify Murray's authority as regent, and 	1
the custody of his enemies, who grew every day more 	1
the danger of allowing the duke to shake himself loose, 	1
the danger of the reformed church imminent, when an 	1
the dangerous tendency of their schemes in that king-~ 	1
The dangers arising from suffering Mary to return 	1
the daughter of the reverend Mr. Nisbet, one of the 	1
the dauphin, it is evident that, in their opinion, the rights belonging to the 	1
the dauphin should assume the name of king of Scot- 	1
the day on which he was required to appear. By the law and practice of 	1
the death of cardinal Beatoun, Mary of Guise, the withFrance, 	1
The death of Francis the second had happily delivered 	1
The death of Henry blasted all these hopes. It hap- Jan. 28, 	1
the death of James the sixth, in six large volumes ; 	1
the death of that monarch, Alexander, the next earl, 	1
the death of their brother Edward ; and, at the same 	1
the debates of the general assembly, the History of 	1
the deepest policy, and supported by the most formid- 	1
the deficiency of the funds set apart for their sub- 	1
the delays, the evasions, and subterfuges, to which 	1
the deposing a queen, to whom the crown descended 	1
the deputies, who were then at Paris. The English, 	1
the design of reestablishing the Roman catholic religion, or at least of ex- 	1
the designs of her enemies, and seeing through their 	1
The designs of the earl of Huntly against the prior The earl of 	1
the design was concealed with care and conducted with 	1
the desire of the Edinburgh booksellers, who could no way be 	1
the desire of the whole nobility in an act concerning all the points of reli- 	1
The desperate state of their affairs imposed on the 	1
the detail of these circumstances by the writers of that 	1
The detaining her any longer in England, she foresaw, 	1
the different counties, August 4, it appears that the queen's intention was 	1
the dignity and interest of their order. Delighted, on 	1
the discoid causes of it lay much deeper. Almost every article in 	1
the discovery of her artifices, might engage Mary in 	1
the discussions: Hume and Adam Smith were often 	1
the disgust which they had conceived against him, and 1566. 	1
the doctrine which they had embraced, as well as to 	1
the dominion of bigotry. Laymen and courtiers were 	1
the drudgery of civil business, too impetuous to observe 	1
the duke of Chatelherault, and earl of Huntly, imme- 	1
the duke of Chatelherault, of his pension, and by be- 	1
the duke of Somerset near Pinkey, with no better sue- 	1
the duke, that he appeared to be wavering and irre- 	1
the duties of social life with scrupulous exactness. 	1
the duty which they owed their sovereign, and to aspire 	1
The earl of Argyll, and James Stewart, prior of St. 	1
the earl of Argyll, the prior of St. Andrew's, and some 	1
the earl of Arran executed this extraordinary resigna- 	1
the earl of Arran, had espoused the cause of the con- 	1
The earl of Arran had scarce taken possession of his Schemes of 	1
the earl of Douglas were annexed to the crown, but all 	1
The earl of Hertford to the king's majesty, Newcastle, April 17, 1544. 	1
the earl of Hertford, who commanded the fleet and army which invaded 	1
The earl of Lennox alone, in spite of the regent and 	1
the earl of Lennox n , and invited him to return into 	1
the earl of Lennox's pretensions to the succession, in order to intimidate and 	1
the earl of Mar to surrender it, consented to put the 	1
the earl of Murray's conduct with the duke of Norfolk was 	1
the earl of Murray with some degree of applause y . 	1
the'earl of s ^ ea( ly courage and of prudent conduct. He stood im- 	1
the earls of Crawford, Ross, Murray, Ormond, the 	1
the earls of Douglas, Lennox, Angus, March, and above 	1
The early part of his life was restless and enterprising, 	1
The ecclesiastics in that age bore the grievances 	1
the effect of their sufferings, and the cause of many of~ 	1
The effects of the new system which Mary had A parlia- 	1
the effusion of blood. He represented to the confe- 	1
the eighth, rendered the latter part of it no less feeble. 	1
the eighth to disclaim the pope's authority, and to seize 	1
the eldest son of lord Forbes, without sufficient evidence 	1
the elegance of her court, had mitigated, in some de-*^j^ 	1
the elevation of a churchman to the highest office in 	1
the eloquence and authority of the famous Gerson, to 	1
the Encash. now duke of Somerset, and protector of England, en- 	1
The encounter in the field was not long nor bloody; but, 	1
the encroachments of military power. 	1
the end of his days a criminal correspondence with her 	1
THE END OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 	1
the enemy. He, with the consent and in the name of 	1
the enemy, received them with a determined resolution, 	1
the enemy should endeavour to interrupt their march, 	1
The Eng- For this purpose Mary's ambassador, Robert Melvil, 	1
the English and French ambassadors, whom she had 	1
the English, and to divide their strength by the sud- 	1
The English army, consisting of six thousand foot The Eng- 	1
the English crown as ill-founded, she was not ignorant 	1
the English crown, she had not, however, relinquished 	1
The English fleet cast anchor in the road of Leith, 	1
the English, injury rendered the Scots more averse from an union 	1
the English nobles would not only concur in restoring 	1
the English resident, and another from Maitland, both directed to Cecil. 	1
the English resident, in order to secure Elizabeth's as- 	1
theEngUsh next attempted to draw the English nobles to approve 	1
the enmity of a man so capable to obstruct her designs. 	1
the ensuing summer. Perhaps you have seen in the papers, 	1
the entire government of the regent, and quickly per- 	1
the entreaties of her people, could extort from Mary 	1
the errours of a provincial dialect : for this purpose he 	1
the errours of her own administration, and begged 	1
the established superstition. That subtile and refined 	1
the eternal and immutable laws of justice and of virtue, 	1
the event of that examination. This suspicion received 	1
The excessive admiration of ancient policy was the occasion of Knox's 	1
the execution of her highness' commandments and service, that her justice 	1
The exertions which Robertson made on this occa- 	1
the exiled the life of Rizio. Morton, Ruthven, Lindsay, and 	1
the exorbitant power of the nobles. If they were not 	1
the expediency, of the proposed relief, he adds : 	1
The expedient she contrived for her vindication strongly 	1
the expedient which the duke had suggested. 	1
the express commandment of the king and queen ; that, 	1
the extended reputation of the head master, Leslie, 	1
the extirpation of the whole order, rather than an act 	1
the extraordinary marks she had given of her own at- in g him - 	1
the extraordinary powers vested in it, to the military 	1
the extreme jealousy with which the Scottish nobles 	1
the eyes of all Europe. Among the Scots, both parties 	1
The fables concerning purgatory, the virtues of pilgrim- 	1
The facility with which lord Darnly obtained per- 	1
the factious barbarians above mentioned. 	1
the family, I believe I should have lived and died there. I 	1
the fate of all authors, ' serius, ocyus, sors exitura.' He will 	1
the faults of their sovereign, which they were bound, 	1
the fears and suspicions of that prudent prelate on this 	1
The feeble administration of Robert the third must Robert the 	1
the feeble and unsteady conduct of their leader had 	1
The fertile and projecting genius of Maitland first con- 	1
the feudal constitution, the most indulgent of all princes 	1
the feudal constitution. To accomplish this, however, 	1
the feudal governments, and inconsistent with the fa- 	1
the feudal governments, commerce, the chief means of 	1
the feudal law ; and produced such illustrious examples 	1
the feudal system be overturned in almost every particular state in Ger- 	1
the feudal system in a more advanced state, and refined 	1
the feudal system of laws and policy, that stupendous 	1
the field, and encountered them near Bannockburn; 	1
the field, at the head of a powerful army of their fol- 	1
the field, at the head of their armies, and met near 	1
the field of literature. The two subjects which appear 	1
the fiercest political hatred, embittered by religious 	1
the fiercest zeal, were made instruments for advancing 	1
THE FIFTH BOOK. 	1
the fifth ; but perceiving, as he advanced, that a His- 	1
the fifth, to the death of queen Mary. I have the more com- 	1
the fire of the English fleet, which lay in the bay of 	1
The first accounts of this league filled the queen 	1
THE first ages of the Scottish history are dark and The origin 	1
the first article, as I had observed in my note to page 422. 	1
the first, availing himself of the situation of affairs in 	1
THE FIRST BOOK, 	1
the first dawn of the new light, they did not venture far 	1
The first discovery of the train which was laid, came 	1
the first exertion of it would be to recall Bothwell ; and 	1
the first exertions of those powers, which its members 	1
the first heat of resentment, he had driven the earl of 	1
the first infringement of the present treaty, or on the 	1
the first instance belonged to the nobles, and they easily 	1
the first of August. The universal passion for liberty, 	1
the first of February 1759, and was received with such 	1
The first of these was the murder of her uncle, the 	1
The first period is the region of pure fable and con- 	1
the first promising opportunity for prosecuting her right 	1
the first rank had fallen into the hands of the English, 	1
THE FIRST VOLUME. 	1
the first, whom the emperor was preparing to attack 	1
the flame. They had now commenced hostilities against ^nglom in 	1
the floor, to hinder the noise of his feet from being 	1
the following description of the general assembly from 	1
THE following extracts from letters found among the 	1
The following history is confined to the last of these A review 	1
the former acknowledges the present of Dr. Robert- 	1
the former institution. In both these, the gratification 	1
the former ; of the latter there is undoubted certainty . 	1
the former part of his life, discovered no great compass 	1
the former tranquillity and order would be restored to 	1
the forms, or to enter into the details necessary in con- 	1
The fortifications of Leith, though advancing fast, were 	1
THE FOURTH BOOK. 	1
The fourth of October was the day fixed for open- The con- 	1
the frantic zeal of Poltrot. This blow proved fatal to 	1
the French ambassador, and have some appearance of 	1
the French and English armies quitted Scotland. 	1
the French are the same in the modern. Full of them- 	1
the French counsels, and the progress of their arms in 	1
the French court; his real grief and resentment painted in 	1
the French forces ; and these two passions, mingling, 	1
the French forces in Scotland should instantly be sent 	1
The French, instead of extinguishing, added fuel to Attempts to 	1
the French interest in Scotland. The same zeal 	1
the French king, and queen of England, were refused 	1
the French king. The former was intrusted with mat- 	1
the French monarch. For these reasons, Henry having 	1
the French queen. As Mary, in compliance with the 	1
The French She was busy, at the same tune, in procuring the 	1
The French, who entered into it with greater coolness, 	1
The fre- VI. The frequent wars between England and Scot- 	1
the friar in terms which, in our times, will appear as shocking as they are 	1
the friends who attended him to the playhouse some 	1
the friend- the cardinal at Callendar, renounced the friendship of 	1
the fury and outrage of civil war. In this situation, 	1
the general assembly determines, as the court of last 	1
the general disaffection of the nobility, and a new dis- 	1
the genius of feudal policy. Nothing could be more 	1
The genius of the feudal government, uniform in all The reasons 	1
the* "gent I an( l, where his adversaries were endeavouring, in his 	1
the gentleness of her disposition, and seeming indiffer- 	1
The gentleness of the queen's administration, and Dissensions 	1
the geographer derive his materials but from the labours of 	1
The good effects of Murray's accession to the re- Success of 	1
The government of a queen was unknown in Scot- 	1
the government of the kingdom, and consented to the 	1
the governor of Dunkirk, in the disguise of a sailor, 	1
the gratitude and liberality of David added, by distri- 	1
the great council of the nation to confirm their dubious 	1
the greater facility. Under pretence of examining the 	1
the greatest and most opulent subjects, in richness of 	1
the greatest eminence and authority dealt out among 	1
the greatest princes in Europe, she had hitherto been 	1
the greatest satisfaction, and in much less time than I ever 	1
the great events connected with the reign of Charles 	1
the great men held lands by no other right than what 	1
the grief and indignation that preyed on her heart. 	1
The grievances of the congregation, and their de- 	1
the ground on which he was to act; to balance the 	1
the growing power and wealth of the nobles. He sum- 	1
the Hamilton manuscripts in three volumes folio. They are 	1
the haughtiness of a king, and to put on that imperious 	1
the head of these, and with the character of legate 	1
the hearts of her subjects, who were impatient for her the queen's 	1
the heir of all the extensive dominions which belonged 	1
the highest computation, can hardly be reckoned equal 	1
the high offices in civil government devolved, on this 	1
The high spirit of the Scottish queen could not well Mary of- 	1
the historian? ******** 	1
the historian, may be supposed to be perfectly ac- 	1
the historian the extract is taken,) intimately connected with Dr. Robertson 	1
the historical summit of Parnassus, immediately under Dr. 	1
THE HISTORY 	10
THE HISTORY BOOK 11. 	1
THE HISTORY BOOK HI. 	3
THE HISTORY BOOK in. 	3
THE HISTORY BOOK iv. 	5
THE HISTORY BOOK m. 	2
THE HISTORY BOOK v. 	1
the History of Charles the fifth, appeared the History 	1
The history of Europe, during the fourteenth and 	1
the history of Scotland, chiefly by means of records 	1
the honour of being presented to the D n's children at 	1
the honour to be, my lord, 	1
the hope of impunity. James had not even provided 	1
the hopes of gratifying the French monarch, whom the 	1
The hour of the queen's delivery now approached. 	1
the house of Austria, No family had ever gained so 	1
the house of Guise, and influenced by the seasonable 	1
the house, so as to render any opposition it could give, 	1
the houses of York and Lancaster, was still recent. 	1
the humble scenes of political economy, than the great 	1
the idea, and furnished the model of the latter system, 	1
the ideas of her subjects, and knew what they would think of her giving ear 	1
The ignorance or bad taste of an age may render the 	1
The ill success of these efforts of private revenge Take arms 	1
the impartial and rigorous administration of justice, 	1
the impetuosity of her zeal. Even the unrelenting 	1
the impression of cavalry, broke them, and drove them 	1
the imprudence of irritating so great a body of well- 	1
the imputation of which the queen endeavoured at that 	1
the inaccurate and oppressive system established by 	1
The inclination of her own subjects was another, and The send- 	1
The indignation which betrayed the queen into this 	1
The indignation which many persons of rank ex- 	1
The influence, however, of any national custom, both 	1
the influence which he gradually gained over the as- 	1
The inhabitants, heartily attached to the cause, set open 	1
the inhabitants of the southern counties, were almost 	1
the inhabitants. The queen was obliged to mortgage 	1
the injuries which he had done his sovereign. Murray, 	1
the inquiry into her conduct; and, until that were 	1
the inquiry into Mary's conduct should appear to be 	1
the inquiry to any length, and to perplex and involve 	1
the inroads of the Goths and other barbarians obliged 	1
The instruction begins with observing, that the king had originally in- 	1
the instrument for deceiving his party, instantly aban- 	1
the insults she might suffer in a kingdom torn by fac- 	1
the intentions of the French court, in making these 	1
the intercessions of his other friends with the whole of 	1
the interest of England, and would willingly have per- 	1
the interest of their order became their only object, and 	1
the interest of the subjects which they discuss, will, 	1
The interests of the French and English courts were ~~ 	1
the interview at York. But the clergy dreaded an 	1
The intrigue carried on for restoring the Scottish A rebellion 	1
The intrigue was now in so many hands, that it August 13. 	1
their abhorrence of the yoke which was preparing for 	1
their accounts of it, that subsequent historians can 	1
Their acquaintance with the principles of the reforma- 	1
their advantage in practising upon them. But, as no 	1
their adversaries, they resolved to preserve the appear- 	1
their affections ; and the religious disputes, occasioned 	1
their aid f . But such lying wonders, as were beheld 	1
their allies, than the English by their victory. After closer union 	1
their ancestors, with a profusion no less undiscerning 	1
their armies long assembled; and even a very small 	1
their assistance. A prince, whom even war and victo- 	1
their assistance, the cardinal seized on the persons of tion against 	1
their attempts to humble them must be viewed as the 	1
their authority and the end of their hopes, they carried 	1
their authority which arise from the aristocratical ge- 	1
their banished friends, and security for the protestant 	1
their bended knees, and with folded hands, swearing 	1
their benefices. On the other hand, the queen agreed 	1
their blood and treasure in defence of the crown, had 	1
their camp; and sir James Hamilton of Cadyow, the 	1
their cannon, and killed at least double the number 	1
their chief amusement ; they divided their time between 	1
their choice ; if any invasion should be made upon Eng- 	1
their conduct as we would wish our own to be viewed 	1
their conduct in treating their sovereign so harshly, 	1
Their confessions brought to light many circumstances 	1
their country. But the spirit which some of them dis- 	1
their country, had reason to conclude that his dominion 	1
their countrymen to fall in with his proposals. A cause 	1
their countrymen under Oliver Cromwell, in the follow- 	1
their country surmounted all other considerations, and 	1
their country. The alarm spread from man to man, 	1
their crimes. 	1
their customs, had probably an intention of introducing some considerable 	1
their declining grandeur on a firmer basis, they, at 	1
their direction. Nothing but the royal dignity remained 	1
their discords in everlasting oblivion. This reconcile- 	1
their dissatisfaction with his government, and their con- 	1
their enemies, when a small boat from the opposite 	1
their e*nemies ? You admitted into your presence my 	1
their English allies. 	1
their example, and, by degrees, they were communi- 	1
their example, by punishing those to whom they im- 	1
their first appointment, these judges had continued in 	1
their followers, though of undaunted courage, yet, be- 	1
their forces in opposing any person who endeavoured to 	1
their friends and adherents, assembled for that purpose 	1
their frontier towns, while a campaign continued but a 	1
their general, produced an effect to which there is no 	1
their gratitude for that seasonable and effectual aid 	1
their grievances, was presented to the queen; but with- 	1
their habitations there. Fierce and bloody wars were, 	1
their hands. 	1
their hands and seals. But on the part of France, all 	1
their hands possessions which belonged to the church. 	1
their importance. But, as it would have been absurd 	1
their indignation in their pulpits. These echoed more 	1
their indignation, that the sufferings of their queen did 	1
their infancy or early youth, cannot be recollected, and sc ' 	1
their inferiors, ' bonds of manrent.' By the former, the 	1
their intention of depriving James of a crown, of which 	1
their interest and his great abilities so justly merited. 	1
their interior quarrels by innocent and bloodless victo- 	1
their invasion of Scotland occasioned, we shall stop to 	1
their jealousy and terrour. This conduct of our mo- 	1
Their juris- buted towards depressing the regal power. By the 	1
their knees, besought her to allay the jealousies and 	1
their knowledge, their prudence, were the talents to 	1
their lands of him ; and as the safety of each individual 	1
their language, their manners, and religious rites ; cir- 	1
their leaders labour to restrain this impetuous spirit of 	1
their liberties, rendered necessary r . 	1
their life, lands, and goods." Keith's Hist, of Scotland, 198. 	1
their merit, is in no degree diminished by an attentive review 	1
their moderation f . By these arts the queen gained 	1
their mortifications and austerities, endeavoured to re- 	1
their most considerable supplies, both of men and pro- 	1
their name, that no crime should be imputed to them 	1
their neglect, it should be allowed to spread, they were 	1
their niece to take possession of her kingdom, with as 	1
their notions from the books published there ; and, in 	1
their opinions rash, precipitate, and inaccurate. It is 	1
their own account ; but either no violence was intended 	1
their own conduct, and to throw the blame entirely on 	1
their own hands, enabled them to live with a princely 	1
their own limits. But now the great map of mankind 	1
their own manners, sowed among the great families the 	1
their own persons, against the rage of that powerful 	1
their own queen, in every thing not inconsistent with 	1
their own quiet and security. The change, too, which 	1
their own safety. They did not, in the mean time, 	1
their own sovereign, could not be deemed innocent. 	1
their own weakness, and the strength of their adversa- 	1
their pardon, and leave to return into Scotland. Mary, 	1
their parts in perpetrating this detestable crime. Every that crime 	1
their persons under protection. The difficulty of main- 	1
their possession of it more secure and independent. 	1
their possessions, and their persons ; and endeavours 	1
their property to their determination, and their en- 	1
their prospect of recovering the patrimony of the church 1561. 	1
their queen, and to their country ; submitting the pub- 	1
their rebellion 4 . Many of the lower people flocked to 1569. 	1
their relief, than prescribe some new regulations con- 	1
their religion, and the liberties of their country s . 	1
their religion, which was issued six days after her ar- 	1
their resentment against particular noblemen; and all 	1
their resentment, and the latter hoped to gratify their 	1
their retreat; but the principal barons, with an obsti- 	1
their schemes, gave a great shock to his adherents. 	1
their scruples with respect to the match, and encou- 	1
their seniority, and in failure of them, those who were 	1
their sentiments, they retained their ancient revenues. 	1
their sole rivals. Secure of so powerful a concurrence, 	1
their sovereign d . The remainder of her time she em- 	1
their sovereign, they were accompanied, even in times 	1
their sovereign was extremely short. Three days after 	1
their strength in tedious sieges, undertaken under many 	1
their strength to check its growth, before it rose to any 	1
their superiors. 	1
their tenure, boroughs renounced their right of elect- 	1
their territory. These great officers again parcelled 	1
their union with England, were desirous of rendering it 	1
their unnatural confederacies with England, were suf- 	1
Their vie- But this victory, however great, was of no real utility, 	1
their virtues. Calvin, whose decisions were received 	1
the Italian and German wars, the French had become 	1
the Italians saw the danger which threatened Christen- 	1
the jurisdiction of magistrates, and the authority of 	1
the jurisdiction of the various orders of ecclesiastics, 	1
The jury themselves seem to have been aware of the 	1
the just proportion. The Scottish clergy paid one half 	1
the keeping her, for some time, under restraint; yet 	1
the king and queen inviolably to observe them g . 	1
the kingdom. 	1
the kingdom, all eyes were turned towards France, no 	1
the kingdom; and, in this address, they spoke in a 	1
the kingdom, and setting at liberty their wretched in- 	1
the kingdom, as a depression of themselves. At their 	1
the kingdom during a minority, she let him see, that, 	1
the kingdom. Even in that turbulent age, when so 	1
the kingdom happy. Of much discernment, and no 	1
the kingdom in his name. Many efforts were made to 	1
the kingdom ; their wealth great, their connexions ex- 	1
the kingdom, the prudent valour of Bruce, and, above 	1
the kingdom, to impose on them a small tax, and to 	1
the kingdom was governed, first by his uncle Robert, 	1
the kingdom were all the queen's adherents; but, as 	1
the king in his own court. The great barons, or lords 	1
the king lay was blown up with gunpowder. The noise 	1
The king, meanwhile, stood astonished at the bold- but she 	1
the king might have been brought to condign punish- 	1
the king's conduct, was murdered, if we may believe 	1
the king's elder brother, but prolonged the captivity of 	1
the king's had shared in his son's disgrace, and, being treated 	1
The king's Henry's behaviour, at this juncture, perfectly discovers 	1
The king still remained at Stirling in solitude and 	1
the king suddenly entered the apartment by a private 	1
The king The haughty spirit of Darnly, nursed up in flattery, 	1
The ladders, which had been provided for the assault, 	1
the laird of Calder, and the other the lord friends, will take upon 	1
the land from her view, she would neither retire to the 	1
the last king were revoked y . 	1
the late commotions; and, having access to observe 	1
the late insurrections, should be left entirely to the 	1
the late insurrection ; that no French garrison should 	1
the late treaty, reestablished there the rites of the 	1
the late truce, in the hands of the protestants; and 	1
The latter appeared to be no less impracticable. To 	1
the latter beyond all doubt. To have suffered the 	1
the latter, protection was stipulated on the one hand, 	1
the latter she declared herself inexorable. Murray and 	1
the latter, which exposed the constitution to more im- 	1
the latter with unprecedented severity. And, if his 	1
the laurels and triumphs that he expected, had begun 	1
the laws of humanity ; and with such indecent haste did 	1
the laws to decide. But, in order to avoid the miseries 	1
The leaders of the congregation, distrustful of the 	1
the leaders of the party, by new and more solemn pro- 	1
the leaders of the party, promised that, on condition 	1
the leaders of the party which adhered to' the esta- 	1
The leaders of the protestants, however, by this pru- 	1
the leaders of the protestants in Scotland ; and, in com- 	1
the leading men of that party as ministers, than to pro- 	1
the learned. 	1
the least appearance of national injury dissipated, in 	1
the least complaint of neighbouring princes. But the 	1
the least good of it. A plague take you ! Here I sat near 	1
The length of the Scotch pike or spear was appointed by Act 44. Parl. 	1
the lesser barons. 	1
the * lesser barons.' The former were those who re- 	1
The lesser barons were indebted to James the first for A.D. 1427. 	1
theless, one of the most considerable articles ; and the 	1
The library of the faculty of advocates at Edinburgh, 	1
The licentious lives of the clergy, as has been already 	1
the lieutenant in the discharge of his office. Every ~ 	1
the list of crimes to that of duties, such dissimulation, 	1
the literary system which belongs to it. This objec- 	1
the lord chancellor presided 1 . In rude ages, when the 	1
the lordship of Darnley, which was all that appertained unto 	1
The lords of A meeting of the leaders being called, to consider 	1
the lords of articles, that the proceedings of that high 	1
THE lords of the congregation soon found, that their 1559. 	1
the lords of the congregation thought it incumbent on 	1
The lords of the council to the earl of Hertford, lieutenant in Scotland, 	1
the love of pleasure, which at that time prevailed in 	1
them. 	2
them a 	1
the magistrate must be recognised, and his decisions 	1
the magnanimity of Richard, revived the claim of so- 	1
the maintenance of the clergy . The last was a matter 	1
the malecontents was chiefly composed, soon put his 	1
the malignity of his disease. 	1
them, and completed the rout. Huntly himself, who 	1
them and the martial nobles, who were apt to view the 	1
the man himself, whose interest and reputation it was 	1
the manner of writing and orthography," with a variety 	1
the manners of the age described ; the revolutions in 	1
them an unfavourable opinion of my hospitality, unless they 	1
the man were an over-match for the maxims of the king. 	1
the man whose hand was most adventurous and suc- 	1
the man who was so violently suspected of having mur- 	1
them are marked with archbishop Spotiswood's hand ; 	1
the marquis d'Elbeuf was, at that time, preparing to 	1
The marriage of the Scottish queen continued still Negotia- 	1
the marriage of the Scottish queen with any of the 	1
them at pleasure, without any process or form of law, 	1
them, at such time as your majesty's army shall be in Scotland, to destroy 	1
the matter, the original possessions of the nobles seem 	1
the matter to her by a letter. Henry, who had refused 	1
them, at this juncture, to inquire into the maladminis- 	1
the maxims and spirit of the ancients, with regard to 	1
the maxims by which they had hitherto regulated their 	1
them. But, even in that event, she determined not to 	1
the mean condition of a province, annexed to the do- 	1
The members of the congregation assembled from all 	1
the men from whom I could wish to obtain praise and cen- 	1
them esteem ; and a very slender portion of knowledge 	1
them, felt it not only as an injury, but as an insult, and 	1
them. forces drawn up almost on the same ground which the 	1
them h ; and he himself advancing with a considerable 	1
them her resolution of extirpating the reformed religion 	1
them. However, such particulars as occur to my me- 	1
them in a body ; their army was seldom less numerous 	1
The ministers of a number of contiguous parishes, 	1
them in the field ; but, having artfully passed the queen's 	1
them in the treaty with Elizabeth, and, thereby, to bind 	1
them into many small kingdoms, was in no condition to 	1
them less than his neglect. Individuals alone suffered 	1
them long or intricate. A queen, vanquished by her 	1
them. Maitland, with his usual sagacity, foresaw that 	1
them many persons of distinction. The regent marched 	1
The mob now attacked the houses of those who had 	1
The modern theories, which represent this right as 	1
them of having devised and executed the murder of 	1
them of that authority, which, in their hands, becomes 	1
them of that popular applause which was the chief 	1
them on a level even with the princes of the blood them- 	1
the monarch, at his own expense. Six hundred horse- 	1
the monarchs of Scotland ; free and independent, as 	1
them on b . 	1
the money. 	1
them on such broken ground. The Hamiltons, who 	1
the more decent name of a subsidy. But, in all ages, 	1
the most admired compositions of the ancients. But, 	1
the most ambitious wish which I entertained, was to 	1
the most delicate and interesting that can possibly fall 	1
the most destructive to society, came not only to be 	1
the most distant corners ; and when nature has erected 	1
the most extravagant height in those countries which 	1
the most fatal consequence to Mary. The crown of 	1
the most fertile counties in the kingdom were exposed, by the sudden and 	1
the most flattering distinction; she even allowed him 	1
the most heinous crime must be mentioned by name 	1
the most heinous which had been offered to it, since 	1
the most important in the kingdom ; and, though usu- 	1
the most intolerable calamities to which the wretched 	1
the most limited prince in Europe the most absolute 	1
the most magnificent promises. He had offered to give 	1
the most nattering to my ear is, to find my name associated 	1
the most unanimous and active zeal. The act of obli- 	1
The motives But, whatever opinion we may form with regard to 	1
the motives of his crimes, was solemnized. The cere- 	1
the motives of this extraordinary journey, the reader must judge what de- 	1
the motives which induce a writer to undertake any 	1
them possessed by a very dubious title, were as little 	1
them ready to yield the obedience which is due from 	1
themselves. After a long hearing, to the astonishment 1563. 	1
themselves an opportunity of gratifying their avarice or 	1
themselves, have enabled her to recall Bothwell, and 	1
themselves privy to the design, assert the reality of the conspiracy. Good, 	1
themselves secure even within the walls of Edinburgh, 	1
themselves that a combination so strong would be al- 	1
themselves, was extremely prudent. Other expedients, 	1
themselves, were aware that this could not be urged 	1
themselves within the sphere peculiar to their sacred 	1
them, she became extremely willing to be reconciled to ~~ 	1
them ; she threatened and promised ; she remitted sub- 	1
them susceptible of the deepest impressions of supersti- 	1
them, than the resolution which Mary had taken to 	1
them, that, if the queen should, with her usual insin- 	1
them. There are two different accounts of the manner of their election, at 	1
them the seeds of jealousy and distrust, by insinuating 	1
them the spoils of the vanquished. But this expedient, 	1
them, they will rise, during war, to their former import- 	1
them to be so. I fled into your arms, as into those of 	1
them to favour his ambitious schemes, and to connive 	1
them to his English subjects. These were expelled by 	1
them to set the power of the crown, which they already 1563. 	1
them to still greater power. When the king himself 	1
them to take arms in order to restore their queen to 	1
them to the gates of Edinburgh, were on the point of 	1
them to this edition of Dr. Robertson's works. 	1
themTrre- occasioned by any of .those slight disgusts which in- 	1
The multitude, dazzled with their success, and con- 	1
The murder An event which happened a short time before the 	1
The murder of cardinal Beatoun was occasioned by private revenge ; 	1
the murder of the king, to whom he was nearly allied, 	1
the murder, suspicion fell, with almost general consent, on Both- 	1
the murder upon the queen, and he had not hitherto 	1
them with disdain. As she advanced, the malecontents 	1
them with such arms as they could procure; and, had~ 	1
them with the same coldness as he did the other great 	1
The na- I. The nature of their country was one cause of the 	1
the name and pretensions of the Scottish queen, they 	1
the name of ' beneficia' or * fiefs,' was divided amongst 	1
the name of Douglas ; he exercised, without the title 	1
then animated the nation, they seem to have laboured 	1
the narrative was continued, by different monks, through 	1
the nation. 	1
the nation 1 . 	1
the nation, and had gained an ascendant over all its 	1
the nation, but discovered few marks of military genius, 	1
the nation deemed to be founded in truth, and to be 	1
the nation discovered themselves, in a circumstance, 	1
the nation itself had been brought to the brink of 	1
the nation. Mary herself possessed many of those qua- 	1
the nations which overturned the Roman empire, and 	1
The natural effect of this indignation was to add 	1
The nature of their function gave them access to all 	1
The nature, too, of a considerable part of their pro- 	1
thence she was conducted with many marks of respect 	1
thence to the count d'A. who is but four years of age, I heard 	1
the necessity of consulting her upon every difficulty 	1
The nego- In order to conduct an affair of so much importance 	1
the negotiations were spun out to a great length, and 	1
The negotiation with England, relative to the mar- 	1
the neighbouring counties supplied every thing neces- 	1
the neighbouring vices. His address sometimes dege- 	1
the new administration. 	1
The new mode of government easily made its way among 	1
the New World. The origin and progress of the Bri- 	1
then* furious ambition, armed with sovereign power. 	1
then happened may be slightly touched, but merit no 	1
the night, with all her forces, and appearing before 	1
then, not only directed all the proceedings of parlia- 	1
the nobility, but, instead of enabling him to carry on 	1
the nobility, of the severity of his government, and of 	1
the nobility with the utmost coldness and reserve. Those 	1
the noble" Kirkaldy , who conducted her toward the confederate 	1
The nobles, after having mortified the cardinal so lately 	1
the nobles and of the people against him, to a great 	1
thenobles. et * among tne causes of the grandeur of the Scottish 	1
the nobles, had been gained by attacks upon indivi- 	1
the nobles in no degree abated. The book of discipline 	1
the nobles. It was composed of bishops, abbots, ba- 	1
the nobles of the party, a considerable number of lesser 	1
The nobles On the first intelligence of her approach, the con- 	1
the nobles present subscribed the paper on the nineteenth, and that next 	1
the nobles queen's heart ; the murder of the king had excited no 	1
the nobles resumed their pacific system, and resolved 	1
the nobles rose towards independence. Not satisfied 	1
the nobles, secured the king, for some time, from oppo- 	1
the nobles themselves so anxious, as might be imagined, 	1
the nobles, the prince possesses considerable power, 	1
the nobles, to whom she rendered herself agreeable by 	1
the nobles, who would have found in Henry a willing 	1
the novelty and splendour of the royal presence, but 	1
then reverenced as the common father, and often ap- 	1
then threw the keys into the lake. Mary ran with 	1
the number, and popularity of the protestant leaders ; 	1
The number of inferior clergy, to whom the care of 	1
The numbers on both sides were nearly equal; but 	1
the number, who lived to give both the regent and 	1
The numerous forces which Mary brought into the 	1
the numerous forces which Mary had assembled ; and ciates - 	1
the objects of hatred and of contempt, the discourses 	1
the objects of national jealousy and aversion. The im- 	1
the object which the French king had most at heart; but 	1
the obsolete claim of the superiority of England over 	1
The occasion of Luther's being first disgusted with 	1
the offer which she had made, endeavour to disappoint 	1
the offices of lord justice general, great ehamberlain, 	1
the'omrse' established forms of the constitution, for which, even 	1
the one, and to enforce the other, possessed little 	1
the one half of his countrymen from exterminating the 	1
The only device, which they employed, in order to 	1
the only fund which could be employed for their relief; 	1
the only object of desire, and he pursued it with an un- 	1
the opinion of those with whom I converse, the public wish 	1
the opposition of his parliament, and, in order to prevent that, an artifice 	1
the order of lineal succession was so remarkably broken. 	1
the ordinary administration of business. Two acts of privy council, one on 	1
the original feudal constitution of the empire still remains, and ideas pecu- 	1
theory, and these must also be all cancelled, and that this 	1
the other. 	1
the other by the regent's most choice troops, and not 	1
The other contains an account of an inroad by the earl of Hertford, be- 	1
the other hand, his ambition was immoderate; and 	1
the other hand, the solitude of the place rendered it 	1
the other nobles were bound, by every obligation, to 	1
the other received as a fugitive. 	1
the other subject would necessarily require." 	1
the owner of it, to detain her as a prisoner. Thisjj 	1
the pains I have taken, in order to render it worthy 	1
the palace. At two next morning, the house in which 	1
the papers which he has collected relating to Gowrie's 	1
the papers which Lindsay presented to her. By one 	1
the parlia-^ as ^y * ne ordinary forms of business, it became neces- 	1
The parliament did not think it enough to condemn 	1
the parliament fell upon a very extraordinary expedient. 	1
The parliament granted every thing the confederates 	1
The parliament was ready to enter on business, with 	1
the parlia- *, . T , i T-I * i 	1
The part assigned her, at this juncture, was to divert 	1
The partisans of the confederates reasoned very dif- 	1
The parti- tion to aggrandize them. To enumerate the most re- 	1
the party. Argyll submitted to the king's government, 	1
the party. The latter was recommended by the clergy, 	1
the patronage of the strong. By degrees, these asso- 	1
the payment of her dowry, by depriving her subject, 	1
the peaceable and regular demeanour of so numerous a 	1
the pen of a gentleman 5 , whose profession and country 	1
the people, than prudent, proceeded to rash and unjustifiable acts 	1
the people ; the resentment of France, the power of the 	1
The period from the death of Alexander the third 	1
the personal power of a regent should enable him to 	1
The person towards whom Mary began to turn her Mary en- 	1
the person to whom a crime was imputed had a right 	1
the person who moved and actuated the whole body of 	1
the person who resorted to the earl of Hertford. It was, more probably, 	1
the piece at the Edinburgh theatre. The sour au- 	1
the pious son he pretended to be ; that the appearances which 	1
The place chosen for committing such a deed was the 	1
the place of that duty and respect which a subject owes 	1
the place of trial attended by five thousand of his fol- 	1
The place prepared for his reception was a house 	1
the plan which he had begun, with the utmost vigour ; 	1
the point of right and privilege, and to accept the re- 	1
the political causes w hieh facilitated the introduction of these new 	1
the pope's authority; and that, by suffering it to be 	1
the possession of that power which he had lost. Per- 	1
the possessions and honours which the partiality of the 	1
the poverty of princes prevented them from fortifying 	1
the poverty of the country, and were obliged to conduct 	1
the poverty of their country made it impossible to keep 	1
the power and pretensions of that ambitious race. Her 	1
The power and wealth of the church kept pace with 	1
The powerful family of Douglas no less dreaded 	1
the power of enforcing, without control, obedience to 	1
the power of planetary influence f . 	1
the power of the nobles so formidable, he durst not 	1
the powers of a ready and commanding orator, by the 	1
The power The powers which the feudal institutions vested in 	1
The preachers being disappointed by the men in 	1
the preamble to the laws of Robert the third, they are 	1
The precipitate retreat of the congregation increased 	1
The prejudices of the nation powerfully seconded these 	1
the presbyterian plan, Knox, with the assistance of his 	1
The presbyteries send two hundred and ninety mem- 	1
the present age and posterity, and raise the character of our 	1
The present unsettled state of the succession left much 	1
the prince into his power, with an anxiety which gave 	1
the prince, made no alteration in the aristocratical spi- 	1
the prince's ne esteemed all that he had gained to be precarious 	1
the princes of Lorrain. He had represented the im- 	1
the princes of Lorrain, her brothers, with most pas- 	1
the princes of Lorrain were at the height ef their power; 	1
The princes of the house of Austria remembered 	1
the princess Elizabeth in marriage to his eldest son, 	1
the prince whom he had assassinated, and the guardian 	1
The prior of St. Andrew's, the earl of Argyll, the earl 	1
the profane ministrations of the protestants to have de- 	1
the professors of the religion aforesaid may and shall have occasion to praise 	1
the progress of superstition ; for it is the nature of that 	1
the progress of the reformation. The queen, being se- 	1
the project. But so deeply did they resent this attack 	1
The pro- nation into the most dangerous convulsions. The earl 	1
The pro- Nor were the protestant clergy considerable gainers 	1
the property of the public, made great and valuable 	1
the proprietors of the History of Scotland purpose to end the 	1
the prosecution of an injury offered to his family too troublesome, or too 	1
the protection which, ever since her return, she had 	1
the protection which she afforded it, from motives of make great 	1
the protection which the queen regent, from political 	1
The protes- It was with deep concern that the lords of the con- 	1
The protestant army, wherever it came, kindled or 	1
The protestant doctrine did not suffer much by his 	1
the protestant ministers, many different interests were 	1
the protestant religion have been established, without 	1
the protestant religion, these plausible and popular 	1
the protestant religion ; to allow the citizens of Edin- 	1
the protestants, among whom he possessed that un- 	1
the protestants; and they were not yet considerable 	1
the protestants found no difficulty to raise an army. 	1
the protestants in her kingdom to power and favour, at 	1
the protestants in the southern counties, the former 	1
The protestants, shocked no less at the indecency with 	1
the protestants were alarmed, but not terrified. Ani- 	1
The protestants were, by this time, almost equal to the 	1
The protestants, who, from their union, began, about 	1
the provost's house. Notwithstanding all her argu- 	1
the prudent reasons mentioned in his preface. 	1
the public records. A greater number of letters of ' legitimation' was granted 	1
the purpose of publishing a periodical review of litera- 	1
The queen 	1
The queen, accustomed from her infancy to splendour 	1
the queen ; and, destitute of their aid and counsel, de- 	1
The queen, by her conduct, demonstrated these pre- 	1
the queen commanded mass to be celebrated in the 	1
The queen, conformably to the plan which had been She employs 	1
the queen dowager, and affected to treat him with so 	1
the queen dowager and her adherents, his engagements 	1
The queen dreaded the event of a battle with men 	1
The queen, encouraged by having so considerable a 	1
The queen having determined to reward the services 	1
The queen herself gave occasion to this, by the reply their remon- 	1
the queen in his favour, and insensibly paved the way 	1
the queen lost all credit with her adversaries ; and no A secon( j 	1
the queen of England, they could not have kept long 	1
the queen of England would attempt nothing against her per- 	1
the queen of Scots. He saw the infamy which would 	1
the queen of Scots, that he would supply them both 	1
the queen of Scots. The young duke was a minor; 	1
The queen, on her recovery, discovered no change The queen 	1
the queen regent, seconded, on this occasion, by all the 	1
the queen's affections began gradually to be estranged 	1
The queen's army was posted to advantage on a ri- 	1
The queen's elevation to the office of regent seems to 1554. 	1
The queen's ^ er authority was, while it depended on the poize of 	1
the queen's instigation, lay in wait for him on his return, terce P ted&gt; 	1
The queen's scheme began gradually to unfold; it 	1
The queen's supported by the rest of the queen's army, they were 	1
the queen suffered an irreparable loss by the defection [hi queen 	1
The queen, surprised at the approach of so formi- 	1
the queen that the demand was rejected by the convention of 	1
The queen The confederate lords carried on their preparations 	1
the queen, to himself, and to his family f . 	1
the queen to m0( j erat;e ag fa e Q nor so daring a s the other. Mary 	1
the queen to provide against any such danger in times 	1
the queen, who well knew how dangerous it would be 	1
the queen with calumnies, which, as they affirmed, she 	1
the question being put, they started up at once, and 	1
the rage of Edward; foreign writers had recorded 	1
the rage of his enemies put an end to his life, piercing 	1
ther, and the only place of strength in the kingdom 	1
the rapine and oppression of the strong. In every cor- 	1
the rash invitation which they had given. The peculiar 	1
the ratification of the treaty of Edinburgh. 	1
The ratification of this article would have been of 	1
the ra ueen fcause &gt; of involving Scotland in those calamities, under 	1
ther by a patient and industrious culture of the mental 	1
ther, Catherine could never forgive such a disappoint- 	1
there appeared so little vigour or harmony in their 	1
There appeared some prospect of danger from an- 	1
there appears no evidence to prove that it was com- 	1
the reasons of the strange resolution which he had 	1
the rebels ; and obliged the considerable barons in those 	1
there could rise to be great or populous, amidst conti- 	1
there determined, notwithstanding the entreaties and 	1
therefore conclude abruptly by assuring you that I am, 	1
therefore, summoned to appear within three days before the queen in Holy- 	1
the reformation advanced towards a full establishment 	1
the reformation, and on the same day was celebrated 	1
the reformation, in every other part of Europe, with 	1
the reformation, infused generous sentiments concern- 	1
the reformed faith, seem to have considered it as an 	1
the reformed teachers p ; and composed, as might be 	1
the reformers, and, above all, the barbarous and illegal 	1
the regency, that high dignity ; and, in support of his pretensions, 	1
the regent. 	1
the regent, after stipulating with him, not only that her 	1
The regent and his associates were drawn, it is plain, 	1
the regent could not retain his authority, without a 	1
the regent either did not foresee the danger which 	1
the regent had betrayed the kingdom to its most invete- thecardmi "' 	1
The regent, however, would not consent, even at 	1
the regent, it was no easy matter to overreach or to 	1
The regent Notwithstanding the cold reception which their pro- 	1
the regent of Scotland to impower proper persons to 	1
The regent, on his return, found the kingdom in the Efforts of 	1
the regent's assistance. By their long experience in 	1
the regent's confining the cardinal as a prisoner, from an 	1
The regent's inconstancy and irresolution, together 	1
The regent undertook to procure for the conspirators 	1
the regent upon his natural brother, John Hamilton, 	1
The regent was no less successful in his attempt to 	1
the regent, who commanded the Scottish army, had 	1
there is not one expression of regret, or one symptom 	1
There is only one passage which looks like your opinion, 	1
There is still another point in which we differ, and which 	1
The remainder of my first period of the Decline and Fall, etc. 	1
thereof, and of their lands, lives, etc. and may with the better will jeopard 	1
there, or to confine her in a prison. The former was 	1
the repair of the said Wishart to your majesty by post, both for the delivery 	1
the representatives of boroughs were introduced into that assembly ; and 	1
there prevailed in Scotland, with respect to criminal 	1
The reputation for learning, which, however incon- 	1
the reputation of being sincerely attached to religion, 	1
the request, and would consent to nothing more, than 	1
the request. But, while the one queen solicited with 	1
the resentment which Huntly had conceived against 	1
the residence of their prince, were not only dazzled by 	1
The resolution of the English privy council, with Mary car- 	1
there, spoiling and destroying as aforesaid, with the wise foresight, that his 	1
The rest of Europe observed all the motions of these 	1
the rest were allowed still to hope for favour g . 	1
The rest, who dreaded the exorbitant power which 	1
The return of the earl of Murray, about this time, Murray as- 	1
the reve- j n every corner of the kingdom. No legal provision 	1
the revenues of the church were an alluring object to a 	1
the revenues of the regular clergy. His system of re- 	1
The reverence due to their sacred character, which 	1
the reverence which they derived from religion. The 	1
The revival of learning in the fifteenth and sixteenth 	1
there was no equality in point of discipline. The 	1
there were no grounds to hope that she would agree 	1
There were not wanting, however, political motives 	1
There were only four towns in France where he could establish ' grands 	1
therewith wn i cn h* 8 reputation for wisdom, and known attachment 	1
ther had been distinguished. His presumption claimed, 	1
ther his first condition, nor the office she had lately 	1
the right of the Scottish line m ; and signified her dis- 	1
The rigour of the season retarded, for some time, the 	1
therine of Medicis. Though Catherine had taken plea- 	1
therine of Medicis, whose insidious policy was employed 	1
the rise and progress of it deserve to be traced with 	1
The rise of About this time a new favourite grew into great cre- 	1
The rise of P^ ace( l him in a station in which he ought naturally to 	1
the Roman catholics were exposed to any personal in- 	1
the Romans, in order to defend the centre of their em- 	1
the Romish church. By another act, the jurisdiction 	1
ther out of pride or ignorance, neglected the proper 	1
the royal authority above control, and have rendered 	1
the royal prerogative would soon be stretched beyond 	1
ther papist or protestant, had joined the congregation 1566. 	1
ther plaindealing, nor upright meaning, but great dis- 	1
ther published his famous Theses, which shook the 	1
thers entered warmly into this scheme, and supported 	1
thers, who knew her secret disapprobation of the vio- 	1
ther, the deputy-governor of Carlisle, to know what re- 	1
ther the Scottish nor English queen durst avow these 	1
therto unacquainted with the government of women ; 	1
the rules of prudence, or reconciled to the principles 	1
The rumour of his son's marriage to the queen began 	1
the rumour that was spread of his marriage with the 	1
ther z ; and forsaken by the tribe of courtiers, who ap- 	1
the said space of twenty days, and to receive such direction and commands 	1
the salary attached to this last office was two hundred 	1
the same advantageous terms for himself, which had his office, 	1
the same arguments have been good in courts, and of 	1
the same at all times ; and wherever men think clearly, 	1
The same causes occasioned the unusual confluence 	1
the same impressions were not made in the more distant 	1
the same kind to the French king, and to the duke of 	1
the same night of his wound a . 	1
the same power of irresistibly fixing the reader's in- 	1
the same snare which had been fatal to the former earl. 	1
the same time, in the name of the king of France and 	1
the same time, the controversies in religion being left 	1
the same time the queen set at liberty lord Gordon, 	1
the same ungovernable rage of the people, remained to 	1
the same year he was admitted into the college and 	1
the scene in which he acted. When the capital was in 	1
the Scots, 	1
the Scots, and their lands seized by new masters. Amidst 	1
The Scots carry their pretensions to antiquity as high Origin of 	1
The Scots, soon becoming jealous of their designs, 	1
the Scots, the power of the sovereign was extremely 	1
the Scottish barons to Norham ; and having gained 	1
the Scottish borderers. The two earls, together with Dec. 21. 	1
the Scottish borderers, who were superior to all man- 	1
the Scottish deputies had, in their oath of allegiance 	1
The Scottish monarchs had the sole right of nomina- 	1
the Scottish queen and her subjects, and began to act 	1
the Scottish queen her right to the succession, being 	1
the Scottish queen, she now considered herself as the take t s c 	1
the Scottish queen, was no other than might have been 	1
these accounts, the congregation maintained, that the 	1
these acts of authority, he tried the spirit of the nobles, 	1
these added together, produced a revenue so scanty 	1
These arguments produced their full effect upon 	1
these, a single circumstance, peculiar to the constitu- 	1
These barbarous orders seem to have been executed with a rigorous and 	1
these causes concurred in infusing into the queen's 	1
these circumstances were unknown to Bothweil, there 	1
the second, a prince void of genius, and without expe- 	1
THE SECOND BOOK. 	1
the second narcn P u ^ an en ^ * a ^ moderate and pacific measures 	1
these confederacies ; and, while disorder and rapine 	1
these deeds, was bathed in tears ; and while she gave 	1
These doctrines, calculated to rectify the opinions, 	1
the seeds of discord among the nobles, that union, 	1
these great qualities, and rendered her government 	1
these he discharged with the punctuality of a true 	1
these into her hands, Elizabeth's schemes were incom- 	1
these letters fell into the queen's hands. To assemble 	1
these, murdered both him and his brother. Crichton, 	1
these negotiations for subverting the reformed church, 	1
the sentence of outlawry, which is incurred by non-~ 	1
these parties would form a confederacy which might 	1
these precautions, by way of defence, he began to treat 	1
the sequel, rendered her reign so illustrious, attracted 	1
These reproaches roused the nobles, who had been The nobles 	1
these restraints being now removed by the death of 	1
These revolutions in Mary's fortune had been no less 	1
the sermons are mostly extemporary, and, by conse- 	1
these sixteen met together, and elected eight knights of the shire, and eight 	1
these splendid proposals of the Austrian family would 	1
These suspicions are confirmed by the most direct 	1
these they continually appealed, as the most unanswer- 	1
these : unacquainted with the arts, and unimproved by 	1
the seventh, her grandfather, whom, in several features 	1
these was considerable, and they possessed great in- 	1
these was the regent of Scotland. He had given great 	1
These were immediately commanded to fortify Leith, 	1
these words, " Judge and revenge my cause, O Lord!" 	1
the shiftings of faction, we scarcely ever find him hold- 	1
the siege, and the loss of part of their magazines by an 	1
the siege. No princess ever possessed qualities more 	1
the silence of Randolph, the English resident, a man abundantly ready to 	1
the sincerity of their reconcilement. 	1
the situation of France, rather than the terrour of the 	1
the sixth, 1755. This sermon was translated into German by Mr. Ebeling. 	1
The sixth article remained the only source of contest 	1
The small II. The want of great cities in Scotland contributed 	1
The small IV. The smallness of their number may be mention- 	1
the small-pox in her infancy. Sadler's Letters, p. 330. An additional 	1
the solicitations at this time of so many powerful princes, 	1
the south lying open to the English, no town situated 	1
the Spanish adventurers, are related with a temperate 	1
the spirit of ambition, and in preserving a parity of rank, 1560. 	1
the spirit of liberty. . Men became more acquainted 	1
the stage, who, under her management, had, for a long 	1
the statutory clauses mentioned in the text. The intention of passing the 	1
the stretches he made towards absolute power. By 	1
The strong castles, in which they resided, afforded 	1
the strongest assurances of her protection, and the lords 	1
the strongest colours ; resolutions even taken by him to form 	1
the strongest confirmation from another circumstance : 	1
the strongest passions of the human mind, and obtained 	1
the strongest terms. 	1
the strongest terms; and Francis and Mary solemnly 	1
the strongest terms; and pretended to foresee many 	1
the strong possession it takes of the heart. Contrived 	1
the strong resentment which calumniated innocence 	1
the subject is mentioned once only by each of these 	1
the subject, no consideration of interest or reputation 	1
the subject of serious concern, the union of the two 	1
The subject of the Appendix was what interested the pub- 	1
the subjects on which they insisted. While the re- 	1
the subjects without the authority of the sovereign, was 	1
the subscribers of these papers we find the earl of 	1
the subsequent reigns. In the beginning of the six- 	1
The subversion of the feudal government in France, 	1
the success of this negotiation with the court of Eng- 	1
The suggestions of her French counsellors contri- The regent 	1
the superstition of mankind, in rendering the thunders 	1
The superstition of popery seems to have grown to 	1
the suspicion and disgust of the nobles. 	1
the tedious intricacies of negotiation. These motives ~ 	1
the tenets of the Romish church, and how, from a small 	1
the tenth of January, it was stipulated in this treaty, 	1
the territories which they held in England, was in no- 	1
the terrour of an invasion, concerted with little policy, 	1
the third. 	1
THE THIRD BOOK. 	1
The third, that Mary should be brought to public 	1
the thoughts of appearing in France, in a rank inferior 	1
the thoughts of Elizabeth and her council. If their 	1
the time of his leaving Stirling. In a letter written with 	1
The title of king was the only thing which was not 	1
the title of the house of Stewart. She aimed at nothing 	1
the tomb has closed on their remains. 	1
the town and castle of Berwick. As Berwick was, at 1559. 	1
the town. But as the crowd about the gate was great, 	1
the town, but were beat from it with great slaughter, 	1
the town openly insulted both. At last, a few of the 	1
The tragical amours and marriages of Henry the 	1
the tragical and unnatural murder of his son, he im- 	1
the tranquillity of a private life, to an office destitute of 	1
The transactions in Mary's reign gave rise to two 	1
The treason of which you have been guilty is detest- 	1
the treaty of marriage, the deputies had agreed that 	1
the treaty to such a length, that the greater part of the 	1
The treaty was still so manifestly of advantage to Favoured 	1
the treaty with England, and the delivery of the hos- 	1
the treaty Wolsey had concluded with the emperor at 	1
The trenches were opened at first in an improper 	1
the trial by combat ; to abolish the payment of com- 	1
The trial Neither her entreaties, however, nor those of Len- 	1
The trial of men taken in actual rebellion against 	1
the truth of this to Mary's own ministers. App. No. VI. Cecil, in a letter 	1
The turbulent reign of James the third affords exam- 1560. 	1
The two factions, which divided the kingdom, were 	1
the two kingdoms ; a river, almost everywhere ford- 	1
the two kingdoms; that she should confirm the pre- 	1
the two members of the sentence. You omit the re- 	1
the two noblemen of greatest influence in the kingdom, 	1
the two queens p . Mary was not a little alarmed at 	1
the unavoidable ruin which the measures she therein 	1
the undaunted spirit of liberty which prevailed among 	1
the unexpected death, first of Henry and then of Fran- 	1
the unhappy person who suffered, the event is little 	1
the uninterrupted exercise of their function, when of a 	1
the union of her people might have prompted her. 	1
The union of the two kingdoms was a desirable object 	1
the united efforts of the two kingdoms. For this rea- 	1
The universal applause with which this new work 	1
The universal defection of the nobility, the growing 	1
the university was marked out as an object of peculiar 	1
the unsettled state of the kingdom from the death of 	1
the use of a man of letters. The tranquil leisure which I 	1
the utmost, and amused them so artfully with many pro- 	1
the utmost ; and the passions which it occasioned often 	1
the utmost civility; and, on each side, the professions 	1
the utmost pains to heighten their disgust, which dis- 	1
the utmost point to which her ambition aspired, no 	1
the utmost submission, to the princes of Lorrain, her 	1
the utmost terrour and confusion, confessed first to 	1
the utmost violence, in the minds of the earl of Huntly 	1
the utmost zeal, when a difficulty was started concern- 	1
the vanity of that haughty prince ; by submission, flat- 	1
the vanquished with moderation. A patron of learning, 	1
The version was made by M. Suard, subsequently a 	1
the very time when the catholic princes were combined 	1
the vicomt6 of the city of Bourges to Philip the first, who did homage to 	1
Theviewsof The second circumstance which weighed with Mary, 	1
The vigilance of the reformers detected these impos- 	1
the vigour of her constitution, resisted the malignity of 	1
The vigour of imagination, and sensibility of frame, pe- 	1
the violence of a reformation, carried on in opposition 	1
the violence with which her disappointed passion now ~ 	1
the violent and enthusiastic : pamphlets were industri- 	1
the violent and general dissatisfaction of her own sub- 1567. 	1
the violent operations of an incensed populace: that, 	1
the virtue of individuals has, on some occasions, offered 	1
the V mar- pressed their approbation of the intended match ; but 	1
the warmest feeling and the most accurate judgment. I will 	1
the weakness of her cause. The known character of 	1
the wealth, of the church ; and, by withdrawing these 	1
The wealth which flowed in upon that prince, from the 	1
the western borders z . 	1
the whole assembly. Not satisfied with the common 	1
The whole of this negotiation was industriously con- 	1
the whole plan of her conduct with regard to Murray 	1
the widow of John Russel, esq. clerk to the signet. 	1
the wife easily triumphed over the authority of the mo- 	1
the wisdom and integrity of that assembly. At the 	1
the wisdom and moderation of the constable Montmo- 	1
the wishes and resentment of a father, than such 	1
the words of Herodian, /*o'vo? /3o-&lt;Xe&amp;&gt;v &lt;f&gt;iXo&lt;ro/pia,v ov 	1
the workmen who were employed in finishing the for- 	1
the work. There is one Carracioli, who came to me and 	1
the wounds on both sides were open, and, in the warmth 	1
the wretchedness of her condition, and the excess of 	1
the writings of the reformers ; and having been power- 	1
they affected to consider it as a project altogether vi- 	1
they always touch upon it unwillingly, and with a ten- 	1
They applied to another assembly, to a convocation 	1
They are . As it was uncertain, for some time, what route they 	1
they are nothing more, we may observe that Raulet, the queen's French 	1
they assumed the title of ' lords of the secret council,' 	1
They both endeavoured to dissuade him from it, but 	1
They both run in the queen's name alone. The king seems npt to have 	1
they called in aid the ministers of religion ; and, by the 	1
They came afterwards to be elected by the parliament, 	1
they chose rather to acquire it by political address, 	1
they considered whatever they could retrieve as so much 	1
They con- Soon after the arrival of the English squadron, the 	1
They con- The conspirators, in the mean time, kept possession 	1
they could be of any use towards illustrating that pe- 	1
they could not help harbouring many suspicions con-~~ 	1
They demanded an audience of Elizabeth ; and having 	1
they deprived the queen regent of her office, and or- 	1
they derived from grants of the two dukes of Albany. 	1
they derived from their riches. This powerful body, 	1
they did not come to ask pardon for any offence, but 	1
They discover not only that masculine and undaunted 	1
the year one thousand five hundred and sixty-one. Mary, having appointed 	1
they employed all their credit with the king, and had 	1
they employed for that purpose. Henry the fourth 	1
They employed lord Lindsay, the fiercest zealot in the 	1
They endeavoured to divide the power of the two con- 	1
they endeavoured to infuse into the nation. The as- 	1
They entered without opposition, and were instantly 	1
they executed in the camp near Lauder, with a military 	1
they expected to bring it, were extremely different. 	1
they feared, that James would yield to his entreaties, 	1
they found a superior, or dwelt in cities, where they 	1
They found themselves unable to make head against his asso- 	1
they had acquired over the rest of mankind. They 	1
they had been at the beginning of his minority, or to 	1
they had established in the kingdom. Mary's resigna- 	1
they had hitherto, though with loss to themselves, en- 	1
they had long felt to be oppressive, and which they 	1
they had lost, and added to their monarchy a new king- 	1
they had lost by a single defeat, and render Mary a 	1
they had not abilities or address to bring about by any 	1
they had not force sufficient to obstruct his progress, 	1
they had offered to her authority, and even to her per- 	1
They had persuaded Henry the second to permit his 	1
they had planned out under the former reign, were 	1
they had reason, both from his resentment, from her 	1
They had recourse to delays, and started difficulties, in 1565. 	1
they had solicited at Rome, and obtained, a bull, de- 	1
they had the prudence to refrain from attacking. The 	1
they halted, full of submission, and containing various 	1
They haunted the weak and the credulous; they be- 	1
they have printed. No history of Scotland, that merits 	1
they hoped, by concurring with him, to be in a situa- 	1
they hoped, by punishing them, to intimidate their fol- 	1
They hoped, however, that the union of such a num- 	1
they, in favouring the design. Every preliminary was 	1
they journeying with the power of the earl marshal, the said M r of Rothes, 	1
They mention the black and putrid pustules which broke out all over his 	1
they might have been subjected by these laws, either 	1
They oblige Both parties agreed at last upon a scheme, neither so 	1
they opposed their encroachments. Even the virtue of 	1
the young king. The regent set at liberty the prison- 	1
the young prince, and the security of the protestant 	1
the young queen and her mother, and added to his 	1
they owed their personal independence to those very 	1
They persuaded the queen to seize the church of St. 	1
they poured upon her all the opprobrious names which 	1
they professed, than to give their aid towards the exe- 	1
they protested, if that were denied her, against all the 	1
they pursued, or of the means which they employed. 	1
they ran with emulation to perform it, and happy was 	1
They relate chiefly to the reign of James. Many of 	1
they resolved not to decline an engagement. In Mary's 	1
They retire with order. A body of the enemy hung upon their 	1
they shall stand. In some few places, I shall illustrate what 	1
they should allow her to recover the supreme power, 	1
they should deem necessary for their own security. 	1
They so far restrained the rage of their followers, and 	1
they so justly conceived to be injurious to their mistress, 	1
they suffered themselves to be deceived by Elizabeth's 	1
They take The eager and impetuous spirit of the nation, as well 	1
They talk of Huntly's measures as notoriously treasonable. Randolph men- 	1
they tended directly to that end which they had in 	1
They were addressed to prejudices and passions, which 	1
they were at full leisure to pursue it. 	1
They were both attached to the popish religion, and 	1
they were called to act in a more interesting scene, 	1
they were formed. Murray, being warned of his danger 	1
They were in a situation precisely similar to that of 	1
They were privy to Norfolk's schemes; but the cau- 	1
They were ready to march, before the queen and Both- 	1
they were rejected, with indignation, by men who scorned 	1
they were stopped by some person, who called out, that 	1
they were subjected. He indeed asserts that the altars, which would 	1
they were the production of chance, or the effect of 	1
they would set my house here on fire over my head, so that one of us should 	1
The zeal of the protestant clergy was deaf to all these which of- 	1
thian, by the earl of Hopeton. The income derived 	1
thick, that as easily shall a bare finger pierce through the skin of an 	1
thing his ambition could desire ; and exercised all the the chief 	1
thing resembled a military expedition, rather than the 	1
thing so much as to render the union between them 	1
thing that the zeal of the cardinal thought necessary 	1
thington, Macgill, and Buchanan, to wait upon the 	1
thing which can promote this great end ; and the ne- 	1
thing you think may be useful. The papers you are pleased 	1
think after you have read my volume. He has very need- 	1
think it needless. 	1
think it was necessary to say all in it that -I have said, and 	1
think of their mortality, many die without settling their 	1
thirds of ecclesiastical benefices proved another source 	1
This account is much fuller than Camden's, whose history is 	1
this account, or omit that Appendix altogether, or find some 	1
this action must be chiefly imputed 1 , was still more 	1
This admonition gave umbrage to Mary, and drew 	1
this amiable disposition. About this time, and at no her zeal { * 	1
this ancient practice, the reformed convened in great 	1
this appearance of union, to which Castelnau trusted, 	1
This assembly proceeded to decide with no less de- 	1
This astonishing event was a new proof to the king of 	1
This confidence on his part met with the proper return 	1
This convention appointed the prior of St. Andrew's The queen 	1
this could hardly fail of throwing them once more into 	1
this design of Warton. They applied their remarks to that 	1
this difficult conjuncture. The confederates made 	1
this disorder. Hatred to the king, and contempt of 	1
This expedient for terminating the difference between Elizabeth and 	1
This extraordinary share in the national property 	1
This face of tranquillity in the nation encouraged the 	1
This ferocity, however, made it necessary to discourage 	1
This gained them the leading of the warlike counties 	1
This grant, by which Mary bestowed the inheritance 	1
This haughty and imperious style sounded harshly 	1
this head will be less, and their resentment of my 	1
this he incurred Henry's displeasure; and as it was of it 	1
This he owed to the assistance of the famous Cardan, 	1
this honour was payed me by express order from the D. who, 	1
this horrible action from meeting with proper punish- 	1
This, however, by the more powerful influence of Both- 	1
this important prize. The presumptive heir to the 	1
this imprudent proposal, by which they endeavoured 	1
This is the rage and beastliness of this nation, which God keep all honest 	1
this liberty innocent, had introduced among the French 	1
This makes me suspect that some facts have escaped me ; and 	1
this, many dark passages in our history may be placed 	1
This marriage was the object of that secret nego- 	1
this matter 6 . 	1
this means, be scattered through that kingdom. In- 	1
this might occasion, far from hoping to exterminate the 	1
This minion alone, he said, possessed her confidence ; 	1
this motion, and observed them with the greatest anxi- 	1
this obliged him to divide the strength of his kingdom. 	1
this occasion, all considerations of religion, and united 	1
this occasion. She bent all her policy to defeat or 	1
this occasion; the galley made little way during the 	1
this occasion the irregular attack of Huntly's troops was 	1
this occasion. They were such as might be expected 	1
this occasion, with the prospect of triumphing over a 	1
This occa- The popular rhetoric of Knox powerfully seconded 	1
This open act of disobedience was the occasion of a 	1
this opinion. Anders, vol. ii. 193. Carte mentions it as a proof of Mary's 	1
this opinion ; and even the protestants, who supported 	1
this, oppor- Melvil, her ambassador. As she did not want advo- 	1
This paper contained the strongest declarations of 	1
this paper to Murray and his faction. Anders, vol. i. 26. The bishop him- 	1
This, perhaps, was the most prudent resolution Mary 	1
this prince were more beneficial to mankind, than the 	1
this proved by a manuscript of Dr. Campbell's. I accordingly 	1
This proved variety in their schemes ; yet, without being chargeable 	1
this purpose, a secret correspondence with the court 1565. 	1
this purpose he united with some of his contemporaries 	1
this purpose she early set on foot a negotiation with 	1
This rapid and astonishing success seems to have 	1
this repeal, that such provisos should be inserted in 	1
this resolution. But the case I now think is entirely 	1
This resolution deserves as much censure, as the sin- 	1
this resolution, the priory of St. Andrew's had been 	1
this right, in the name of the king and queen, and with 	1
this rupture between the British queens, rivalship of 	1
this secret was reserved for some future negotiation. 	1
this security perpetual, by the marriage of Edward, his 	1
this ; she both dreaded the effects of Elizabeth's re- 	1
This sudden flight filled them with inexpressible con- is recon- 	1
This suspicion was artfully heightened by the abbot 	1
this tended to increase the aversion for them, which 	1
this the princes of Lorrain resolved to open their 	1
this time, however, the cloud blew over ; the conspiracy, 	1
this time, to be distinguished by the name of the CON- 	1
this time, was seldom at court, instantly communicated 	1
this treaty. On both sides they sought only to amuse, 	1
this trust, he attempted to seize a gang of banditti, who, 	1
This unexpected disappointment proved fatal to the 	1
This unprecedented exaction alarmed the citizens. 	1
This was not owing to the inattention of our princes, Our kings 	1
this was one continued scene of studied and elaborate 	1
this was the best method of executing your intentions. I 	1
This was the very point to which Elizabeth laboured 	1
this work, all these disputed points have been considered with calmness 	1
this work has got her reputation, and procured her a pension 	1
This work procured the author the honour of being 	1
thither, with an impatience which has been considered 	1
tholic religion, at least something for the ease of catholics. Jebb, vol. ii. 	1
THOMAS BIRCH. 	1
thority, and subscribed by nine earls, nine bishops, 	1
thority both of the king and of the regent; and to 	1
thority of a regent would be little capable to subdue, or 	1
thority of the king continued always feeble, and was 	1
thority of the supreme magistrate reaches with ease to 	1
thority over a fierce and turbulent people, who seldom 	1
Thornton, who had published something derogatory to 	1
thor of whatever was reckoned culpable in her conduct, 	1
thors, obtained a complete victory over the Picts, and 	1
those advantages which bestow on monarchs their gran- JhTfeudal 	1
Those among the nobles who wished for a reformation 	1
those apprehensions which the protestants entertained 	1
those burthens, which occupy and oppress other men, 	1
those by whose assistance she had been enabled to rise 	1
those doctrines, mentioned in the petition of the pro- 	1
Those doctrines which are most apt to shock the human 	1
those fears and jealousies with regard to religion, which 	1
those innovations which gave so much offence to the nation, he dreaded 	1
those into whose hands any paper of that kind fell, 	1
those in whose hands they now were ; but must either 	1
those legends, which formerly had only its wildness and 	1
those of the king. The right, however, of judging in 	1
those pecuniary emoluments, which were, in that age, 	1
those places of strength, which Mary required him to 	1
those scenes of gaiety, Darnly, whose qualifications 	1
those subjects who had taken arms against her. She 	1
those villanous whigs who railed at me. 	1
those which she possessed. But armies were then 	1
those who professed it, was the best method for recon- 	1
those who were accused : the banishing Hepburn, earl 	1
those who were most attached to his person. But, on 	1
though altogether abolished in the latter, the public records have been so 	1
Though Darnly daily made progress in the queen's 	1
though, from political motives, she had granted a tem- 	1
Though Henry sometimes attended at court, and ac- 	1
though I had the perusal of your sheets before I printed, I 	1
though in 	1
though in the late insurrection they had deserted him 	1
though I think it entirely groundless, as you will likewise 	1
though it served to humble individuals, did not weaken 	1
though kept in pay by the king of France. 	1
Though Mary discovered on this occasion a mind Is diverted 	1
though Mary's attachment to a man so odious justified 	1
though somewhat detached, deserves not to be for- 	1
though, soon after the duke of Guise's death, she had 	1
Though supported by French auxiliaries, the nobles 	1
thought a repeal of the penal statutes would produce 	1
thought frivolous, should engross in a book what they thought worthy the 	1
Though the British Musaeum be not yet open to the 	1
Though the prejudices of the people, and perhaps the 	1
though the vigilance and good fortune of the princes 	1
though they never received the royal assent, obtained, 	1
Though they set out from St. Andrew's with a slender 	1
thought necessary, and to enter the enemy's country. 	1
though treated as yet with the respect due to a queen, 	1
thoughts of coming to any composition with Mary. 	1
thoughts of continuing neuter ; nor was she at any supports his 	1
thoughts of foreign alliance, and seemed willing to sa- 	1
thoughts of such a dishonourable alliance, 156. But it has been observed that 	1
thoughts, was Henry Stewart lord Darnly, eldest son ^ 1 [, t ^" 1 s ts 	1
Though your work has been scarce a fortnight in the hands 	1
thousand five hundred and sixty-two, had been detained 	1
thousand four hundred and seventeen, it required all 	1
thousand strong, marched towards Dumfries, where the 	1
threatened him, or neglected to provide against it. 	1
threatened their religion with unavoidable destruction ; 	1
threatened the kingdom q . Nor did she think it enough Sends 	1
threatenings, to save her favourite. But, notwithstand- 	1
threats or his entreaties, peremptorily refused, two se- 	1
Three days after the rising of parliament Mary went Bothwell 	1
three or four pages. Unluckily I have been obliged to write 	1
Three several circumstances, however, concurred to 	1
three thousand men into the field, seized, imprisoned, 	1
three times in the year, and forty days at a time, in 	1
three years were elapsed since her return into Scotland ; 	1
Throkmorton's account of what passed in his interview 	1
Throkmorton, were confined and examined. Mary 	1
throne, and the whole kingdom soon united in acknow- 	1
throne. Encouraged by the spirit of the constitution, 	1
throne. In order to remove the causes of the present 	1
throne of Scotland, and reigned with an authority not 	1
throne of Scotland, to the perpetual exclusion of that 	1
throning his brother, he bound himself, as soon as he 	1
through a barren country, to places of difficult access 	1
through all the vicissitudes of her fortune, and others 	1
through it, will secure you the general approbation both of 	1
throughout her whole reign. Averse from marriage, 	1
Throughout her whole reign, Elizabeth was cautious, The Eng- 	1
throughout the kingdom; and a great sum was de- 	1
throughout the kingdom, but even in the queen's own 	1
through the day ; she slept two nights in the chamber 	1
through. The due de B. the eldest, a boy of ten years old, 	1
through the subsequent period. 	1
through which this affair may be conducted : perhaps it may 	1
through your work at one breath at that time, though 	1
thrown into irretrievable confusion, her spirit, which all 	1
thrown open to receive them; and, without striking a June 29. 	1
thrust shoulders likewise so nigh together, the fore ranks well nigh to kneel- 	1
Thus, before any part of the ancient ecclesiastical re- 	1
thus computed : 	1
thus escaped the persecution of savage fanaticism. Of 	1
thy men. 	1
thy of his presence. Shut up with these in his castle 	1
tiality. The nobles who attended her wrote to the 	1
tianity in the Roman empire. In both periods, the form 	1
tiation in England, which I have already mentioned. 	1
tical form of government, such a share of power, as 	1
tical refinement. The maxim of preserving a balance 	1
tic ; but, above all, he lamented to see an ancient king- 	1
tice, after which you may certainly expect that my 	1
tice at Jedburgh, the inhabitants of several adjacent 	1
tice, likewise, that the ninth instead of the tenth of Fe- 	1
tice, or banished from her presence, she should find 	1
tice,' the judges or ' senators' of which were called 	1
tice, whereby no further peril should ensue by her escaping, 	1
tician or a man of gallantry to have delayed consum- 	1
ticle to which, as the source of many important events, 	1
tic or more frugal prince would have improved, an ac- 	1
ticulars, " I should have thought it less criminal in our restoration parlia- 	1
ticulars, one need not wonder that a law " anent cassing, (as its title bears,) 	1
tience ; but, wherever the reformed religion was threat- 	1
tience, however, of her people, the persuasions of her 	1
tience increased his contempt for them, and added to 	1
tient temper of the nation ; she well knew the power, ~~ 	1
ties. * 	1
ties agreed in believing the French to have been guilty 	1
ties by which she equalled or surpassed such of her sex 	1
ties, he had too many of the passions and prejudices of 	1
ties repaired to them, the preachers roused the people 	1
ties, they would; in all probability, take some step pre- 	1
ties were the consequence of their victories, and the 	1
ties which arose in the kingdom, this unworthy trans- 	1
ties without disturbance. 	1
tifications ; and, having placed sentries at the door of 	1
tifices could no longer be concealed, and Lennox, in- 	1
tified with more art than those ancient towers erected 	1
tifying. The regent having arrived at London, in 	1
tile comfort of finding the balance of trade infinitely in 	1
tile operations of the two contending parties, was no 	1
tility and violence. It was the sight of this squadron, 	1
tility, it became common to take arms out of policy ; 	1
TILL HIS ACCESSION 	1
tim". As he was allied to one throne, and the presump- 	1
time, amused the Scottish queen. She hoped, no less 	1
time and industry to it. Though I am not weary of 	1
time, are not considerable enough to be entertaining. 	1
time a total interruption of all correspondence between 	1
time before the meeting of the last parliament, the arch- 	1
time before the tribunal which is its immediate supe- 	1
time, by the deaths of aged ladies, whose inheritance will 	1
time, deserve no remembrance m . At last, an end was 	1
time entirely devoted to the court, added to their jea- 	1
time, erected into ' baronies,' those of others into * re- 	1
time for reflection or repentance. The fleet which had 	1
time, have so much the start of yours, these objections 	1
time have taken a decided part. In both these conjec- 	1
time, he permitted them to return into Scotland, that, 	1
time, her presence and authority were a check to their 	1
time in France f . 	1
time in Scotland. Edward the first having forfeited the 	1
time in the first bloom and vigour of youth. In beauty 	1
timents of their contemporaries with regard to assassi- 	1
time of her departure from Edinburgh to Glasgow, 	1
time, of his own abilities, and ascribing his extraordi- 	1
time, of some strength, and a town among the most 	1
time of William the Norman, the regular course of de- 	1
time, passing by the posterity of his eldest sister Mar- 	1
time, presented a petition, containing many demands 	1
times. But I must not get into dissertations ; I hope you 	1
times from the Scottish queen; and, as the result of a 1568. 	1
time she ventured to lay aside somewhat of her usual 	1
times in Scotland, had at last been driven out of both 	1
times of peace. His disbanded soldiers mingled with 	1
times would have borne it. He applied the gentler and 	1
time, the lands of that name. These were part of the 	1
time, the objects of his fear. Having acquired power 	1
time they left their retreat to appear in the court of 	1
time to load him. 	1
time to take so true an aim, that he shot, him with a 	1
time we find the protestant clergy complaining more 	1
timorous spirit, who, at the prospect of such imaginary 	1
tinction I have received in your thinking me worthy of 	1
tinent had, hitherto, delayed. But, although a peace 	1
tinguished ; and suitable to this, likewise, were the con- 	1
tinguished by the names of ' lords of session,' and ap- 	1
tinguish it, to utter the same tender expressions of re- 	1
tinual success. His high station in the church placed 	1
tinue advanced no nearer to Stirling. Erskine, being 	1
tinued fire from a body of musketeers, attacked on 	1
tinuing to be the head of the colony, part of the con- 	1
tion. 	1
tion*. 	1
tion aimed at something bolder, and, by introducing 	1
tional animosities and prejudices, were incapable of 	1
tional animosities naturally inspire. What was then 	1
tional animosities, which were blind to all advantages. 	1
tional characters. In one thousand four hundred and 	1
tion allowed me to make such remarks, and I sincerely 	1
tion, almost impossible ; nor could she bear the thoughts 	1
tion ; and, at the same time, Mary of Guise was raised 	1
tion, and became more disgusted than ever with the 	1
tion, and retired to Dunbar. 	1
tion, and, seizing his two brothers, committed the duke 	1
tion, and the candour, moderation, and humanity which run 	1
tion; and the judgment pronounced, instead of being a 	1
tion; and the terms upon which she proposed to re- 	1
tion ; and, though debarred from every spiritual func- 	1
tion, and to have rendered a prince of superior talents 	1
tion, appearing to be most consistent with the genius of 	1
tion, at that time, to take the administration of affairs 	1
tion. But at the same time, in order to screen herself 	1
tion by the queen's arrival in Scotland ; they required 	1
tion, continued to enjoy the temporalities of their be- 	1
tion could make little addition from their own funds ; 	1
tion, drew the attention of her council; and, by en- 	1
tioned. 	1
tioned, and strengthened by carefully preserving their 	1
tioned. But, in order to extricate herself out of these 	1
tioned, was the principal occasion of these. The spirit, 	1
tion. For these reasons, which do not want force, he refused, 	1
tion from their exorbitant and oppressive jurisdiction. 	1
tion had hitherto been extremely popular. Her mi- 	1
tion had perhaps already conceived, and which, in spite 	1
tion, has stored his mind with copiousness of ideas, and 	1
tion, having intelligence of this, marched, in all haste, 	1
tion. He, almost single, ventured to take arms in de- 	1
tion, he had finally determined not to make any settlement in Scotland at 	1
tion. His levity and caprice exposed him to the scorn 	1
tion. I got these papers during the holidays by Dr. Birch's 	1
tion in any future parliament 1 . 	1
tion in the north of England ; and, after all precautions, 	1
tion in which they would no longer need a pardon, but 	1
tion, I only felt, when I came to the conclusion, that you had 	1
tion I received from the perusal of them, I found some things 	1
tion laid before them the declaration which the queen 	1
tion, laid down the grounds of the conduct which they 	1
tion may be to entertain it, prudence should teach them 	1
tion. Melv. 153. Melvil's account is confirmed by Elizabeth's instructions 	1
tion, might have led her to many more 1 . The regent 	1
tion, obliged them to submit to his government, with- 	1
tion, obtained a separate pardon ; but not without diffi- 	1
tion of a critic ; carried along with the stream of the narra- 	1
tion of affairs. She was warmly attached by blood, and 	1
tion of ages, and in return you get a few flying leaves of 	1
tion of ages to come. 	1
tion of England ; her enemies could not possibly look 	1
tion of former treaties between the two kingdoms, and 	1
tion of her character. Besides, the tranquillity of her 	1
tion of his innocence. Immediately after his acquittal, 	1
tion of it would be agreeable to the public. I thought that 	1
tion of justice within their own territories. But what, 	1
tion of Morton's, and had married the earl of Murray's 	1
tion of parliament, invited all the nobles who were pre- 	1
tion of parliament was shortened ; and, by a new pro- the exiled 	1
tion of taking further order concerning religion is mentioned, probably with 	1
tion of the clergy. 	1
tion of the crown was accepted, and declared to be 1567. 	1
tion of the inhabitants, by pillaging the country, the 	1
tion of the judge ; banishment was the penalty of the 	1
tion of them into her own hands. But she did not long 	1
tion of the nobles ; that their indecent lives gave of- 	1
tion of the re g en t; was a t Glasgow, holding a court of justice. An 	1
tion of the Scottish parliament, the mentioning of which 	1
tion of this nature, offered just at the critical time when 	1
tion of this plan. Mary was young, ambitious, high- 	1
tion of those from whose protection they expected im- 	1
tion of your valuable book ; I know nobody in this country 	1
tion our author contributed his most zealous support, 	1
tion. Private revenge, inflamed and sanctified by a 	1
tions. A considerable body of them assembled at Stir- 	1
tions among the people, but to the scarcity of preachers, 	1
tions and promises she shook the fidelity, or abated the 	1
tions ; and the trenches were almost without a guard z . 	1
tions before I knew a little of your mind, it appeared 	1
tions brought against her, as should fully remove the 	1
tions evaporated in murmurs and complaints, and no 	1
tions, had neglected Scotland, as a distant and poor 	1
tions, he had placed in prosperous circumstances; his 	1
tions his repeated attempts to assassinate Murray, etc. No hint is given of 	1
tions in Scotland wholly to the duke of Guise and the 	1
tions, its situation in the political state of Europe was 	1
tions might be urged. The noblemen, whose fate was 	1
tions of a people who had once placed in her an un- 	1
tions of civil tyranny. That bold spirit of inquiry, 	1
tions of her guilt were many and strong, it was not 	1
tions of her subjects, might have shaken and endangered 	1
tions of her vengeance if they should presume to dis- 	1
tions of such as were purely religious. Zeal for liberty, 	1
tions of the garrison which the queen had left there, 	1
tions of the lords of the articles were carried on with 	1
tions. Of this speech I regret that the limits of my 	1
tions on this subject. All that I have ventured to make 	1
tions, or to think of retreating after having* proceeded 	1
tion so vigilant as Elizabeth's, such an intrigue could b r t ' lza ~ 	1
tions perpetual, by condescending to marry the earl of ~ 	1
tions so unequal and disproportionate, she easily saw 	1
tions, to hold a prosperous course ; while his boldness 	1
tions were exquisite, and all its emotions strong, and 	1
tions were proposed, with regard to ecclesiastical disci- 	1
tions were still more wretched and contemptible, than 	1
tions which relate to Mary's letters, I owe to my friend 	1
tion. That prelate, whose private life contemporary 	1
tion; the fanatics thought they saw the fires of the 	1
tion. The great revolution in England, which followed 	1
tion, therefore, which I thought, and still think, so 	1
tion, they were all in arms for his defence, and ob- 	1
tion ; they were swayed entirely by their passions ; and 	1
tion. This was the duke of Chatelherault, who had 	1
tion, though I am satisfied that it neither established the reformed religion 	1
tion to an amicable issue. The indefinite and ambigu- 	1
tion to a princess of Elizabeth's character, than the 8 ^ 8 ,^ 	1
tion, to be split and parcelled out into different hands. 	1
tion to fight. Mary endeavoured to animate them; 	1
tion to personal attendance was continued upon the 	1
tion, to prevent his falling under that contempt to which 1665. 	1
tion to set aside his right of succession ; and, indeed, if they had no design 	1
tion to their usurpation, they promoted it with their ut- 	1
tion to vacant bishoprics and abbeys (l ; and James na- 	1
tion was almost confined within the narrow limits of the 	1
tion was formed for the defence of her person and au- 	1
tion, was neglected. 	1
tion was partial, and at second hand ; some of them had 	1
tion was the effect of much artifice, and must be con- 	1
tion. Whatever apprehensions the Scots had conceived, 	1
tion, whether of interest or of self-preservation, obliged 	1
tion which ended with his life. For the same reason, 	1
tion, which had been so easily dispersed, began again 	1
tion which he demanded. It became necessary to 	1
tion, which no former system of superstition had ever 	1
tion, which was then esteemed sacred ; the latter were 	1
tion; while she, torn early from her son by the cruelty 	1
tion with which he proceeded did not suit then- ardour 	1
tion, with which the prior of St. Andrew's was received 	1
tion with which the queen retired, and the reason she gave for this sudden 	1
tion would regard it as the dissolution of that confe- 	1
tion, zeal, resentment, all prompted him to seek revenge 	1
tious chieftain, or any whom he took under his protec- 	1
tious projects tended, without their approbation. In 	1
tious terrour and credulity. Ignorance and barbarity 	1
tirely under their command, the French turned out a 	1
tirement of a monastic life ; and his enterprising genius 	1
tires from overwhelmed with all the sorrow which so sad a reverse 	1
tiring out of the kingdom, should reside, during the 	1
tiring to his castle at Dunbar, drew thither a greater 	1
tirniv 	1
tisans of the house of Hamilton were his hereditary 	1
tisfied myself with publishing a few of the most curious 	1
tish empire there, he destined for the subject of one 	1
tish frontier, sir Ralph Sadler and sir James Crofts, f money, 	1
tish guards, had imbibed the protestant opinions con- 	1
tish history, has enabled me to place that transaction 	1
tish miles from the place of battle h . 	1
tish nobles, in promoting the measures by which he 	1
tish nobles, to other views and passions. They hoped 	1
tish queen and her contending subjects ; and England 	1
tition the queen of England to take cognizance of their 	1
titled ; it being presumed that no Christian would have 	1
title of king, and appeared in public with a magnificence 	1
titles, and precedence of the popish clergy, are remark- 	1
titles. Hence parliamentary and hereditary right be- 	1
title should be publicly recognised ; that the ' crown 	1
title would have been highly detrimental to Elizabeth, count. 	1
titors, soon after gave judgment in his favour. Baliol 	1
titude. Her alacrity inspired her forces with an in- 	1
titude of princes is seldom strong or lasting, regard to 	1
titudes of indigent, but bold retainers. And if at any 	1
titude towards Elizabeth. But, as she could not be 	1
titude was let loose, and churches and monasteries, the 	1
tive and intrepid courage supplied all his defects, and 	1
tive heir to another ; as he possessed the first rank in 	1
tives. Each queen watched the motions of the other 	1
tives of the crown, naturally inconsiderable, were re- 	1
tives they acted, their silence, which was imputed to 	1
tives which first induced him to join the malecontents. 	1
tive. The assassination of one king, the sudden death 	1
tive, was effectually prevented. To the same cause, 	1
t Keith, Append. 45. Haynes, 231. ' Knox, 203. 	1
T Knot, 330. Parl. 9. Q. Mary, c. 67. Spotsw. 188. 	1
t Melvil, 98. 	1
to abandon that place, and retire in confusion towards 	1
to accompany the queen from Stirling to Edinburgh, 	1
to acknowledge any authority but his own, he created 	1
to acknowledge her own incapacity for governing, to 	1
to acknowledge themselves to be guilty of rebellion, or 	1
to a conclusion, and bring their deliberations to the 	1
to admit Morton and Ruthven into her presence, and 	1
to affect an approbation of Norfolk's schemes. He 	1
to aggrandize themselves, that in all the kingdoms 	1
to a great distance. All the three roads, by which the 	1
To a great part of the nation, the conduct of the 	1
to allow a nuncio from the pope publicly to enter her 	1
to allow me the use of it, I shall return it with the greatest 	1
to allow the exercise of no other religion than the Ro- 	1
to all the power and influence of which Somerset was 	1
To all this we may add, that the clergy being sepa- 	1
to all wise men in both nations ; and the birth of the 	1
to alter or subvert the religion which she found univer- 	1
to a majority of the society, to judge of their existence. 	1
to Angus, and others by their respect for the king, 	1
to a nobleman so nearly allied to the royal family, but 	1
to- any formidable height. But, as the matter was of 	1
to appear in arms, for the common defence, and should 	1
to a reconcilement with that nobleman. He insisted on 	1
To a remonstrance of this nature, and urged with so 	1
to a respectable minister and elder of this church, who 	1
to arms, and, wherever they came, the same violent 	1
to a single man. The same causes which checked the 	1
toas retired from war ? 	1
to assemble forces to obstruct this meeting. Com- 	1
to assert their rights with more freedom and boldness 	1
to assist in his courts. Nor was this esteemed a pri- 	1
to assume it. Darnly's condition, as a subject, rendered 	1
to assume the appearance of concern for her interest, 	1
to a treaty of marriage and of union, but upon terms 	1
to avoid it. 	1
to be adjusted ; many claims to be examined ; and the 	1
to bear this indignity. Destitute of all foreign assist- 	1
to be as valid, in all respects, as if it had been called 	1
to be avowed enemies to Murray, and, with regard to 	1
to become master of the prince's person, together with 	1
to become without being master of the person of the young prince, 	1
to be doubtful. Elizabeth positively asserts that, at the request of the 	1
to be examined, gave reason to suspect that she dreaded 	1
to be found in the Scottish history. In every age, the 	1
to be granted hereditarily; restrained, in several in- 	1
to 'be her immediate heir. A proper opportunity to 	1
to be incapable of listening to any proposition in her 	1
to be included under the general clause, " and all other 	1
to be no farther reason for the regent's producing the 	1
to be no longer regarded; and joined the leaders of 	1
to be present and certain ; and the execution of the 	1
to be proposed in parliament ; and to defeat all these, 	1
to be provided against all these evils. The greater 	1
to be regent. The length and rigour of Mary's suffer- 	1
to be served, honoured, and obeyed," etc. the act goes on, " that as she 	1
to be sound policy, in the present temper of the people, 	1
to bestow on him that mark of her regard, they under- 	1
to be the only thing they wanted, at that time ; and it 	1
to be universally odious. As the queen herself was 	1
to be well-founded, she resolved to pronounce her un- 	1
to blame, and something to commend; and therefore 	1
to break this, and to emharrass Henry by another in- 	1
to bring on the trial without delay. But the precise time could not be 	1
to bring the matter. In consequence of this appeal of Elizabeth 	1
to calm, if possible, the minds of their countrymen they 	1
to capitulate : some other small forts surrendered with- 	1
to Carlisle '. 	1
to carry the crown and other ensigns of royalty to the 	1
to challenge his adversary to singje combat, and, on 	1
to charge Mary with having been accessory to the com- 	1
to come, either by signifying her own resolution to 	1
to come, might have engaged not to assume that title 	1
to communicate to me, shall be shown to no human creature, 	1
to conceal as much as possible. " The promises of 	1
to concentrate the matter in the manner you have done, or to 	1
to conclude a marriage, the first thoughts of which had 	1
to confer such a privilege, or to impose such a burthen, 	1
to consent that both herself and her son should reside 	1
to continue in friendship with England, but not to 	1
to control, and had offered violence to her person, 	1
to court a rival, whom, without manifest imprudence, 	1
to cultivate a friendly correspondence with the family 	1
to death lord Home, and banished the earl of Angus, 	1
to declare that he received it not in consequence of any 	1
to declare, that she recalled the consent which she had 	1
to defeat an alliance which reflected so much lustre on 	1
to defend an ill-fortified town against their assaults. 	1
to defend their rights; and Robert Bruce, notwith- 	1
to delay the trial for some time, and urged in such 	1
to despise, every writer of his own times, who has been well 	1
to destroy that sect in all the countries of Europe 8 . 	1
to detain her in England, was a third. Each of these 	1
to different places, expressing the sentiments of the 	1
to discover those defects in the schemes adopted by 	1
to dismiss their followers, worn out by the fatigues of a 	1
to distribute the small fund appropriated for the main- 	1
to disturb the regent's administration, he was obliged 	1
to do homage for his whole kingdom. Richard the 	1
to Dunbar. Among a warlike people, men of so much power and 	1
to Dunbar, and was followed by the queen disguised 	1
tody, or at least excluded from her court and presence z . 	1
to each many exaggerated circumstances. The following arguments render 	1
to earl David, Baliol's claim, as the representative of 	1
to Elizabeth and Murray, as could not fail to inspire 	1
to Elizabeth, or to her posterity; that she should 	1
to Elizabeth, their protectress, met with a very differ- 	1
to employ in Scotland a powerful army for their assist- 	1
to engage, it will not be impertinent to the purpose 	1
to entertain the most ambitious hopes, by letting fall 	1
to establish ten or twelve superintendents in different 	1
to establish that fact, but as an additional confirmation of the remarks which 	1
to establish them for perpetuity. The moderation of 	1
to expect defence, from their hands. It was the mis- 	1
to fire the beautiful episcopal chapel in Cowgate, when 	1
to flatter themselves, that Francis and Mary would ever 	1
to fly for safety to the court of England, where Henry 	1
to fly thither. Herries, by her command, wrote to Low- 	1
to form a conspiracy against his life. The first uncer- 	1
to form designs that proved fatal to himself, and the 	1
To gain at once such a kingdom as Scotland, was a 	1
to gather and to unite, and was secretly favoured by 	1
together irresistible; and such was their confidence 	1
together', we may, with great probability, pronounce 	1
together with certain representatives from the kirk 	1
Together with his estate and honours, every nobleman 	1
Together with his health, the archbishop recovered 	1
together with the lay-elders of their respective parishes. 	1
together with them at the bar of a superior and a 	1
Together with this discovery of the weakness of her 	1
to give Darnly the title of king. As this was an indignity not to be borne 	1
to give no molestation to the preachers or professors of 	1
to go into Scotland, than he obtained it. Together"" 	1
to grant them the promise of pardon in whatever terms 	1
to greater mildness and humanity j while, at the same 	1
to Haddington and offered their services to the com- 	1
to have appeared to Elizabeth herself k . But the dis- 	1
to have been extensive. The ancient thanes were the 	1
to have been given them by the emissaries of the house 	1
to have chiefly divided the choice of Dr. Robertson 	1
to have exhausted its talent of invention, so that when 	1
to have given their consent to it. He amused himself 	1
to have great influence over the queen, and he grew to 	1
to have his marriage with lady Jane Gordon, the earl 	1
to have procured, in this parliament, if not the reestablishment of the ca- 	1
to have taken no part in the affairs of his native coun- 	1
to have the manuscript, which he sent me. But g,#at was 	1
to her administration. But the English monarchs were 	1
to her ; and this may be pleaded in extenuation of the crime imputed to her 	1
to her character; and plainly intimated, that, -unless 	1
to her commissioners in such a manner, as to avoid 	1
to her dignity, and aid proportioned to her distress q . 	1
to her party . 	1
to her pretensions, and even to her personal safety. 	1
to her rebellious subjects, to be the same thing as if 	1
to her resentment, and to that of her French counsel- 	1
to her that of England in reversion. Mary readily 	1
to hesitate, and raise objections, as formerly. His ne- 	1
to him, by the assembly of nobles at Stirling, concern- 	1
to his designs, had not providence, in pity to mankind, 	1
to his measures. Capable either of influencing their 	1
to his nobility ; in that event, the church would have 	1
to imagine she had given herself up implicitly to her 	1
to imitate the heathens in the pomp and magnificence 	1
to implore the assistance of those nobles whom he had 	1
to infuse into the queen's mind suspicions of her protes- 	1
to instant death. This procured a delay; and the 	1
to insult her authority, to limit her prerogative, and to 	1
to intercede for pardon to their son. But the queen 	1
to irritate Morton, and other great men of that name, 	1
to, is of this kind ; it is plainly rancorous, and written in the very heat of 	1
to it. He seemed to be aware of some objections you 	1
to its members, its forms were prescribed, its terms 	1
to James an elaborate memorial, presenting the nume- 	1
to justice. But the queen, who dreaded the effect of 	1
to lay the record of all its proceedings from time to 	1
told me, that he had lately sent to a grocer's shop for a pound 	1
told that they would quickly burst into a storm, he was 	1
to leave 	1
to leave in it a garrison sufficient to bridle the mutinous 	1
to leave the kingdom; but, by the queen's command, 1566. 	1
to legal authority, some irregularities were unavoid- 	1
tolerated with impunity. 	1
to license and anarchy, even this moderate exercise of 	1
to maintain the lawfulness of assassination. In one 	1
to Maitland. These were full of the most sanguine 	1
to make a merit of yielding to a measure which they 	1
to make any alteration by their assistance. There still re- 	1
to make arms the only honourable profession, naturally 	1
to march into Fife, the county in which Murray, Rothes, Kirkaldy, and 	1
to Mary, informed his court, that the milder schemes, 	1
to Mary in their full dimension and deformity d . Though 	1
tomed, even from their own monarchs, to the most re- 	1
tomed formalities. An indictment was presented against 	1
tomed in their native country. Their general still con- 	1
tomed to deeds of violence, it excited universal horrour. 	1
to me, I exhorted the general to do this act of charity to a 	1
to men who had hazarded their lives on his account, 	1
to me plain, that they were higher than any views 	1
tom. In vain did I remonstrate that this was sooner or later 	1
to-morrow's post, I must beg the favour that you will return 	1
to Mr. Conway, and asked whether it was not possible to 	1
toms of an approaching conversion* 1 . Such was Mary's 	1
toms of selfishness and avarice among their adherents" 	1
to Murray, and resolving, at any rate, to get rid of such 	1
to my book, which I have just now written. I find it very diffi- 	1
to myself that I have, in some degree, obtained the 	1
ton access to their prisoner; and what propositions 	1
tone, and supported by such formidable numbers, the 	1
to negotiate both with the queen and with the confede- 	1
ton ; from which the queen was much alienated. The 	1
ton. His zeal for the reformed religion, together with 	1
ton, sir Ralph Sadler describes the spirit of the Scots as extremely out- 	1
to obtain her subscription to those papers which were 	1
to obtain this, precipitated Henry the third of England, 	1
took advantage of her condition and of her fears. 	1
took along with her those noblemen who possessed the 	1
took hold of the regent by the proper handle, and en- 	1
took its rise, at this time, among the Scots, the effects 	1
took refuge in England. As there is no farther evidence with respect to 	1
took this disagreeable task; that his party had long husband's 	1
took to promote the marriage, and to join him with all 	1
too long. Mary employed tears, and entreaties, and 	1
to one of his own subjects, is to be met with in the histories either of Eng- 	1
to oppose the pernicious system which the princes of 	1
too refined for the age in which he lived. Happy ! had 	1
to others, their sentence was unjust, and they denied, 	1
too weak to curb or to .bring to justice so powerful an 	1
to palliate or disguise them ; nor did they ever call in 	1
to parliament 11 . 	1
to parliament, where their numbers and influence would, 	1
to particular families. At the same time the emperor retains many of the 	1
to part with one of the most opulent fortunes in the 	1
to pay to the king, or to those of whom they held their 	1
to perform all the services which a feudal sovereign 	1
to perform the duties of a presbyterian minister, and 	1
to permit others ; and, in order to support their autho- 	1
topics might be so urged, as to prove fatal to the pre- 	1
to prepare for the storm, Mary issued a proclamation, 	1
to prepare themselves, by the habits of extemporary 	1
to prevent acts of parliament favourable to the royal 	1
to proceed to the forfeiture of those who refused to A P^ r ! ia- 	1
to proceed with more boldness and alacrity . 	1
to procure a grant of the crown matrimonial to Darnley, during all the 	1
to produce the evidence, on which, at the distance of 	1
to promote that interest x : and, soon after, he took a 	1
to promote the interest of that religion which she pro-^YZ/'sTn 	1
to protect, the causes of discord were many and un- 	1
to protect their religion, expressed her willingness to 	1
to punish those who had offended. Such haughty 	1
to purchase an alliance with England at the price of their 	1
to pursue, to exact, or to remit the punishment. While 	1
to recom- public commotion ; he had been acquitted by his peers 	1
to reconcile such a numerous body, asserted the doc- 	1
to regular government, than the preparations made on 	1
to relieve her, nor to mitigate the rigour of her con- 	1
to religion ; f an (; religion. Her ministers, though zealous protestants 	1
to religion ; w ith greater difficulty. It was brought into parliament 	1
to renew them. 	1
to renounce the ancient liberties and independence of 	1
to repair to the queen, and to invite her to return into J."^ i n 	1
to represent the whole body of the nation, at the mar- 	1
To restore Mary to the full exercise of the royal 	1
torian ; and so would you too, if you had any sense. 	1
torian, as a loyal subject, to give it his most serious 	1
torian is the best geographer ; and if historians would direct 	1
torians had been . mistaken with regard to James's behaviour 	1
torians have been more divided, or whose character 	1
torians, not only cut short the days of prince David, 	1
torians of that age relate minutely the circumstances of 	1
torian, the first, the most natural, but at the same time 	1
tories to which I had access, as many papers as would 	1
to rise in their demands. Not satisfied with their first 	1
tors at mercy. On the other hand, if Lesly and his 	1
tors had filled with so much dignity ; to the latter, by 	1
to run. 	1
tory court, and met seldom; the 'daily council' was 	1
tory g . 	1
tory, not only to crush Murray, the ancient enemy of 	1
tory of America, confined solely to the operations and 	1
tory of his own country alone ; the first volume was, 	1
tory, of Scotland, to justify and to autKorize it. Under 	1
tory order was issued. This they could not decline, 	1
to sacrifice the doctrine, and even the power of the 	1
to satisfy your scruples, and to vindicate my own con- 	1
to Scottish nobles, impatient, from their national cha- 	1
to second him, as the defender of the honour and liberty 	1
to secure his observance of this, she required that six 	1
to send forth to the world an edition of the works of 	1
to set aside the claim of the Scottish queen, would have 	1
to set himself in opposition to such a powerful antago- 	1
to shake off the yoke of ecclesiastical dominion, which 	1
to share with his brethren in the common danger, or to 	1
to show his countrymen the example of toleration to all 	1
to signify her disapprobation of the measure, either by mo ~ to 	1
to sir Henry Norris, where she affirms that she commanded Bedford to em- 	1
to society; and punishment would have known no 	1
to solicit the Scots to renew their ancient alliance with 	1
to sooth or frighten the Scottish queen into a compli- 	1
to sooth rather than to irritate them; and, however 	1
to sooth the Scottish queen by gentle treatment, in- 	1
to so pacific a proposition. The preachers, with a few 	1
to spoil and turn upside down the cardinal's town of St. Andrew's, as the 	1
to spread -over the kingdom; and the eyes of all Scot- 	1
to spread the tidings and terrour of their arrival among 	1
to stand by him as one man, and to hazard their lives 	1
to steal out of the field. Bothwell attempted to in- 	1
to stifle and suppress whatever evidence should be 	1
to stoop to the offer of a pension from France, together 	1
to subside, when time and the progress of learning had 	1
to substitute in her place, a person whom the illegiti- 	1
to such a degree the terrour and confusion, which had 	1
To such a memorable period did the lords of the The effects 	1
to such eminence as to deserve commemoration, even 	1
to swallow. 	1
to take ; and, at the same time, to produce the deter- 	1
to take arms 8 . 	1
to take arms; and, having persuaded or obliged the 	1
to take one of these steps. The insuperable aversion 	1
to take place before (h) when that letter is sounded? 	1
to take refuge in different ports of England ; and Henry, 	1
to take that satisfaction which he could not demand. 	1
to take the field, and to face the queen, who advanced 	1
to take the place by assault ; they were met with equal 	1
to that dignity, which had been in the possession of the 	1
to that dignity, which had been so long the object of 	1
to that period of life, when they are more pardonable. 	1
to that point. The multiplicity of public affairs since 	1
to that system of policy by which Bothwell seems to have regulated his con- 	1
to that tyrannical authority with which the ancient laws 	1
to that which she had formerly held in that kingdom. 	1
to the 	1
to the age was considerably abated; and though he 	1
to the ancient enemies of their country, the same jea- 	1
to the banks of the Tweed, they prevented the incur- 	1
to the celebrated traveller, Mr. Brydone ; and another, 	1
to the city the ' superiority' of the town of Leith, by 	1
to the consideration of parliament, the protestants might 	1
to the court of France. After holding a course so ir- 	1
to the crown. He seized, likewise, the earldoms of 	1
to the crown. In a private cause these pretexts might 	1
TO THE CROWN OF ENGLAND: 	1
to the crown of Spain, and to all the dominions which 	1
to the crown with regard to Scotland. The duke of Guise, and the 	1
to the dau- dauphin, eldest son of Henry the second ; and, which 	1
to the dauphin, expressed themselves with remarkable 	1
to the death of James the fifth, contains upwards of 	1
to the eloquence of Maitland, who laboured to prevent 	1
to the English crown ; and, by her secret negotiations, 	1
to the enjoyment of that the hopes of transmitting her 	1
to the enterprise, it must have soon grown to be ex- 	1
to the farce which she chose to act, she appointed sir 	1
to the feudal system, favoured this attempt. An ap- 	1
to the field well furnished all with jack and skull, dagger and buckler, and 	1
to the flames. 	1
To the former part of this commission Elizabeth list- 	1
to the frailty of his subjects, had given the Israelites 	1
to the honours and estate of his ancestors *. 	1
to the impetuosity with which she pursued her own 	1
to the industry and credulity of antiquaries. Truth be- 	1
to the influence of the new opinions in religion. As the 	1
to the inhabitants, and the exclusion of French soldiers now 	1
to the inspection of the English commissioners, the 	1
to their conduct; and though their marriage had not 	1
to their exiled prince, drove Baliol out of Scotland ; 	1
to their former ascendant over the queen's councils. 	1
to their party. These formed a convention, which ex- 1559. 	1
to their persons, and shifting from them, by no violent 	1
to their Scottish subjects, with the treaty between 	1
to their subjects, because they stood most in need of 	1
to the keeping of the earl of Shrewsbury, to whom that 	1
to the king a sufficient number of members in his great 	1
to the king. In order to account for this singular fact, 	1
to the kings of France and Spain, and obtained their 	1
to the lords who were under disgrace. 	1
to the magistrate. But at first, while laws aimed at 	1
to the malignity, of her nature ; and, while they taxed 	1
to them a way to the throne, called in the authority of 	1
to the maxims of the ancient legislators, which modem experience has 	1
to the ministers of France and Spain, who accused her 	1
to them on that account. This homage, due only for 	1
To them she lamented the fatal issue of those violent 	1
to them the former ; the inconsiderate rage of the Scots 	1
to them the gates of their town. Thence they advanced, 	1
to the murder of the king. 	1
to them, with a view to learn whether the queen of 	1
to the nation, though consisting wholly of soldiers. But 	1
to the niceties of language. Some, perhaps, will be 	1
to the nobles. The methods to which the French monarchs had recourse 	1
to the nobles this situation, the truth and importance of this observa- 	1
to the notice of the great, the elegant, and the liberal. 	1
to the opening of the conference g . 	1
to the overtures which they were about to make to her. 	1
to the part she herself would act, if their power there 	1
to the pastoral duties of his profession. He carried 	1
to the principles of religion, and to the maxims of sound 	1
to the protestants than any they had hitherto obtained u . 	1
to the queen, and would have entirely disconcerted 	1
to the queen as the most proper person she could 	1
to the queen, from the bounty of whose ancestors the 	1
to the queen's marriage, several of the malecontent 	1
to the queen ; that indemnity should be granted to the 	1
to the reformed religion, this act is represented by the privy council in a 	1
to the reformed than you seem to apprehend. I beg leave to 	1
to the regent's demands ; nor was he so much disposed 	1
to the reign of Elizabeth, which was made by Dr. 	1
to the right of succession undecided. The memory of 	1
to the sale or success of his work. Nor do I yet re- 	1
To these, and to many other causes, omitted or un- 	1
to these. But the son, however unworthy, could not 	1
to the secretary of state's office, if I want to know the de- 	1
To these general causes may be attributed the im- 	1
to the session and daily council, but new rights were 	1
to the siege of Constantinople, and comprise the ruins of an- 	1
to the Spanish monarchy . 	1
to the suggestions of her foreign counsellors ; and the 	1
to the utmost against Elizabeth, on account of the 	1
to the utmost of her power k . But they discovered no 	1
to the whole body of the protestant nobility, full of that 	1
to the whole nation. Cardinal Beatoun had not used 	1
to the whole nation, irritated already at the excessive 	1
to the years of manhood, and having obtained a safe- 	1
to think of acquiring and establishing an interest with 	1
To this fatal resolution may be imputed all the sub- 	1
To this letter Dr. Robertson returned an answer, of 	1
to those commissioners still remain 1 ", and do honour to 	1
to those nobles who had, by fraud or violence, seized 	1
to Throkmorton, Aug. 26, 1561, informs him, that "the queen's ships, 	1
to throw himself into the arms of the party which ad- 	1
to thwart and disappoint her inclination, produced their 	1
to truth ; but from any society of men no such effort 	1
totter ; and nothing was wanting to complete its ruin, 	1
touched in Scotland. 	1
touch the human heart P. 	1
toun. The cardinal was, by nature, of immoderate am- 	1
toun, who soon became the most eminent among them, 	1
to usurp the government. To believe implicitly whatever they find in an 	1
to view the actions of their sovereign with an indulgent 	1
to vindicate 	1
to vindicate her own honour. But it is evident from 	1
to visit lord Marischal, who will be pleased with your com- 	1
to Voltaire, who in historical description had nearly 	1
towards a full establishment in the kingdom. The first 	1
towards ending the contest, and were little regarded 	1
towards France had long been suspected; but it was 1556. 	1
towards Mary was remarkably dutiful ; and, amidst all 	1
towards obtaining for its ministers a more certain and 	1
towards that vast project which his immoderate ambi- 	1
towards the close of this year, under very different 	1
Towards the conclusion of this year, distinguished The death 	1
towards the growth of their power. The dignity, the 	1
towards the maintenance of ministers, the education of 	1
towards them, which knew no bounds. A disinterested 	1
towards the reestablishment and propagation of the 	1
towards the west borders. The nobles in this part of 	1
towards those whose character it esteems sacred. The 	1
to what happened upon the first establishment of Chris- 	1
to which he pretended the queen had been accessory, 	1
to whom he had communicated his schemes, were in- 	1
to whom he was allied. In forming his schemes, he dis- 	1
to whom they were indebted for the most valuable of 	1
town is commoved against me, and swear great oaths, that if their ships are 	1
town, so used and defaced, that when you have gotten what you can of it, 	1
Towns, towers, stedes, barnekyns, parishe-churches, bas- 	1
town was almost half as numerous as the army which 	1
to yield to that order of men. 	1
to York ; and that haughty and impatient monarch re- 	1
to yourself in the indissoluble ties of gratitude 31 ." 	1
tracted an amazing ferocity of temper and of manners. 	1
tracted the limits of the Roman province in Britain, by 	1
tracted the siege so far beyond expectation, the leaders 	1
tracted the siege to a great length. The circumstances 	1
train of an hundred horse, crowds flocked to their 	1
trance of a new actor on the stage so opportunely, and 	1
tranquillity; and chose rather to acknowledge a title 	1
transgression subjected the offender to the forfeiture of 	1
transition from the depth of distress, to such an un- 	1
transition, settled at last upon the offices which they 	1
translated as soon as they come from the press, provided the 	1
transmitted some hereditary feud to his posterity, who 	1
transmit the articles to herself, and by the light in 	1
transports of her indignation, to enter under the father's 	1
traordinary advantage, as to shake this resolution ; she 	1
trary to her intention. She demanded, with more ear- 	1
trary to reason. No wonder the Scots should easily 	1
trary, which the necessity of her affairs, and the solici- 	1
trates seized both the offenders, and the queen com- 	1
trate who presided over the same district. When the 	1
tration. 	1
tration: I really believe that few (but not evil) will be my 	1
tration of the queen regent, and to preserve their coun- 	1
travagance of ambition could not exhaust. These ad- 	1
tray the whole bloody secret, 404. But besides the absurdity of supposing 	1
treacherously turned then* backs ; and Huntly's follow- 	1
treat agreeable. But Elizabeth herself treated them treatment 	1
treated in a manner suited to her rank ; and, in order 	1
treated them with extreme rigour, and discovered, by 	1
treated with a distinguished familiarity, which could 	1
treated with the greatest respect. Soon after, Both- May 3. 	1
treat from public life, was known by the distinctive 	1
treatment from him, melted into tears, and abandoned 	1
treatment of the father, by their loyalty and duty to- 	1
treatment of the queen, to whose bounty he was so 	1
treat separately with the regent. So many of them 	1
treats Mary sne \ a {^ them before her privy council, to which she 	1
treat the exiles with rigour. This they imputed to 	1
treaty ; and, in token of their sincerity, he ami lord 1569. 	1
treaty. A secret negotiation was carrying on in Eng- 	1
treaty for restoring her, but on such conditions as 	1
treaty of Edinburgh, which had been so often men- 	1
treaty of marriage and union, fitted out several ships 	1
treaty. Q f t ^ e con g re g a tj on to listen to any overtures of peace ; 	1
treaty, too, the influence of France, which had long 	1
trea^ 'with comm i ss i ners of the congregation repaired to Berwick, 	1
tree ; the lairds of Grange, Cunninghamhead, Balcomie, Carmylie, Lawers, 	1
tremely bold. Having formerly held a secret corre- 	1
tremely formidable. Elizabeth acted with prudence 	1
tremely powerful ; but, as it is impossible to render 	1
tremely to her disadvantage. Her friends, at a loss 	1
tremely young, the full authority of a king. He was 	1
treme remissness. At the same time, they neglected 	1
tremities against them. 	1
tress to liberty, and replacing her on her throne. Nor 	1
tress upon Bothwell c . So many steps in her conduct, 	1
trial for her crimes, and, after conviction, of which 	1
trial gave grounds for suspicion, and excited indigna- 	1
trials, a custom, introduced at first by the institutions 	1
trian princes, as well as the danger of too close an union 	1
tribes, and distinguished by different names, were either 	1
tribute towards removing their oppressors, the people 	1
tributing to revive their power. The protestant clergy 	1
tried by judges, whom the lord of the regality ap- 	1
tried by their peers, and condemned ; for what crime is 	1
trifling and ridiculous. Nothing, however, could be 	1
trigues and correspondences, which were the immediate cause 	1
trigues and operations of that busy period. Keith, 96. 1 17. 1 19. 315. 	1
trigues of the queen dowager, the zeal of the clergy, 	1
triguing, wanted that undaunted and enterprising cou- 	1
trine of the reformers. Political motives alone deter- 	1
trines ; instead of attempting to found them upon scrip- 	1
trines of their church, concerning some of the most ex- 	1
trines of the reformers, by overturning the established 	1
trines which they taught, and roused that spirit of in- 	1
triumphed in Scotland, they secretly undermined his 	1
troduced certainty into a matter, which naturally is sub- 	1
trolling the king. Jealous of their privileges, and ever 	1
troops 	1
Troops ar- French interest in Scotland. He sent a considerable 	1
Troops ar- The arrival of a thousand French soldiers compen- 	1
troops, destined for their relief, had been scattered by 	1
troops employed in that service were ill supported. 	1
troops of the confederates were composed of gentlemen 	1
troops to flight, and he himself was slain in the pur- 	1
troublesome station, and, retiring to France, preferred 	1
troversial writer, or to state myself in opposition to any an- 	1
troversies among them. The multiplicity of causes soon 	1
true Scotchman was called upon to join them in aveng- 	1
trusted with the management of all public affairs. These 	1
trust of the greatest importance to both. In Scotland, 	1
trust to the continuance of life with a fond confidence, 	1
truth and morality ; he was aware that what is gained 	1
truth and respect, my lord, 	1
truth, had led the regent to express great esteem for 	1
truth say, that I was never more instructed or amused than 	1
truth to be the prerogative of the wise, while vulgar 	1
try 1 . 	1
try. Emboldened by his retreat, the king and his mi- 	1
try from being enslaved or conquered, by depriving her 	1
try, renounced not their liberty, when they acquired 	1
tThe^rnar * n s w ^ n respect to it. But, in order to set the real 	1
tual for securing their own safety, or perpetuating their 	1
tually in her presence, intermeddled in every business, 	1
tually proposed, could not be made to agree with our re- 	1
tually to recommend to their sister that system of se- 	1
tual method for discovering and convicting those who 	1
tual remittances were promised for the future; and 	1
tue. But concerning the author of the following vo- 	1
tuent members of the Scottish parliament ; concerning the aera at which 	1
tumult in the city q . Murray, Rothes, and their fol- 	1
tunate as the Scottish. Of six successive princes, from Scotland. 	1
tunate, in her whole life. This was her retiring into 	1
tune called him to act and to suffer in Scotland, obliges 	1
tune or disappointment during the siege must be im- 	1
tune to the lowest ebb k . 	1
tunity, advanced unexpectedly, by a sudden march in 	1
tunity, as they say, when the power of the said bishops and abbots shall 	1
tural death ; and the minorities, during that time, were 	1
tural death, his end would have been unlamented* and 	1
turally concluded, that men who expected preferment 	1
turally expected that, under a king of their own blood, 	1
tural on being conducted into a more interior part of 	1
tural to those passions. 	1
turb ; and she began to set on foot new intrigues, with 	1
turbed, first by a secret combination of some of her 	1
turbed with those visionary terrours which make im- 	1
turbing the government now established in Scotland ; 	1
turb the tranquillity of Elizabeth's government, and to 	1
ture accusation should be brought against him on ac- 	1
ture counsel were necessary in the first place, and after- 	1
tured, as we have observed, to violate the treaty of 	1
ture, from the affairs of Scotland. In either of these 	1
ture, he could form no such vast design. To dethrone 	1
ture of more elegant and classical studies, more especially 	1
ture, on the extinction of the protestant religion; in 	1
ture, or to reconcile them to reason ; they left them, 	1
turers in the armies of France, he was admitted into 	1
tures, and exposed not only them, but the cause which 	1
ture security. With regard to all these, Mary could 	1
tures I have judged amiss. You will smile when I send 	1
ture : the principal contributors to this undertaking 	1
ture unknown to their predecessors. But while these But the 	1
ture upon no dangerous or doubtful measure. 	1
turn, and others foresaw dangerous consequences with 	1
turned their eyes once more to England, and resolved 	1
turned to great account. By such a renunciation, the 	1
turned to them, I have not been able to learn ; but, as 	1
turn into Scotland, fortune may be said to have been 	1
turns of the a l mos t impossible for them either to stop short, or to 	1
turn the ancient constitution, and to suppress the reli- 	1
turn the government, of England. In political conduct, 	1
turn their thoughts towards pacific councils. The pro- 	1
turn the whole fabric of superstition. 	1
tury. ' l ~ ing history commences. A thorough knowledge of that 	1
tury, the feudal system had undergone many changes, 	1
tute of James the sixth was repealed. After the restoration, parliaments 	1
tute revoking the king's property, and annexing alie- 	1
tutes of the .most regular or constitutional assembly. 	1
tute, the exercise of religious worship, according to the 	1
tution, but become not mortal till some distant period. 	1
tution of the kingdom? Were fears, and suspicions, 	1
tween Jill- CT .. ' . .._ . , 1 1 	1
tween Mary and her subjects belonged of right to 	1
tween the 8th and 23rd of September, 1545 ; the narrative is more general, 	1
tween the firths of Forth and Clyde, and there fixed 	1
tween us. I speak this chiefly on my own account. For 	1
twelve years old. That at so tender an age he should 	1
twenty other peers and barons of prune rank. To all 	1
twenty-third, 1567, the queen, after mentioning the declaration which she 	1
twice. In both these meetings were exhibited many 25&gt; 	1
Two assemblies of the church were held during thisj une 25. 	1
two campaigns in Scotland, with a spirit equal to their 	1
two centuries and a half, from the year one thousand 	1
two centuries, I presume to contradict the testimony of 	1
Two days after the murder, a proclamation was issued 	1
two different quarters, whence they never could have 	1
two hundred and eighty-six, to the year one thousand 	1
two kingdoms, this was a question of much importance. the J , nde ' 	1
Two of the ringleaders in this tumult were seized, and 	1
Two other hypotheses have been advanced, in order to explain this mat- 	1
two parties should be settled by mutual consent. The 	1
two queens s . 	1
two things must have happened : either the violence of 	1
two years ; a divorce was the only thing which could 	1
tyrs, that more were converted than terrified by such 	1
u Anders, vol. iv. part ii. 56. Melv. 190. 	1
Uary pro- a p ersona i interview with her, somewhere in the north 	1
UC SOUTHERN REGIONAL UBRARY FAOUjr 	1
u Lesley, de Reb. Gest. Scot. ap. Jebb. i.-187. 	1
umbrage to the queen, she recalled Bothwell from that 	1
umph, and ascribes it directly to the hand of God z . 	1
umpire between her and her subjects, and foresaw that this offer, 	1
umpire, which had been unwarily bestowed upon him, 	1
unabated ; her indignation against the authors of this 	1
unabated rancour. 	1
unaccountable security, were wholly unprovided for the 	1
unadvised as to ratify the rash concessions of her am- 	1
unalienable and everlasting. As they had full power to 	1
unalienated, furnished subsistence to his court, and de- 	1
unalterable in her resolution, she affected a wonderful 	1
unanimously concur in the same sentiments : your work 	1
unattained, and they were elevated to a near alliance with 	1
unbounded. All causes, whether civil or criminal, were 	1
uncertain. They had early communicated their scheme 	1
uncertain, they reckon up a series of kings several ages 	1
uncertainty whither to direct their flight, kept together 	1
uncles ; and had been accustomed from her infancy to 	1
uncles, but, above all, the studied and mortifying neg- 	1
uncommon order and tranquillity in the country, that 	1
uncultivated, spirit. On the one hand, violent passions, 	1
under a long imprisonment: they were encouraged to 	1
under contempt. His impatience in this situation, to- 	1
undergone a great revolution. The duke of Somerset's 	1
under Henry the second, we may observe, that the 	1
under her own hand, confirming her evil towards him : be- 	1
under her protection. She observed the prevalence of 	1
under his administration, raised the prejudices both of 	1
under his command, and, dismissing it, shut himself up 	1
under his eye and by his direction, was deemed the 	1
under his management. He wrought upon his ruling 	1
under its influence, by their vast additions to the immu- 	1
Under many discouragements and much oppression, 	1
undermined his credit with the queen, but discovered, 	1
under my hands, that it will form a second and third volume 	1
under one monarch. And though these petty princi- 	1
under pretence of confounding the protestants by the 	1
under pretence of prosecuting his wife's claim upon the 	1
under pretext that they were carrying provisions to a 	1
under restraint, suspicion of Elizabeth's partiality, or 	1
understanding, and those legends which farthest exceed 	1
understood the subject, I have ever thought that the best his- 	1
undertaken purely in compliance with her own demand, 	1
undertakings, and his neighbours easily found the way, 	1
under the command of monsieur Desse, assisted by 	1
under the command of monsieur d'Oysel, a creature of 	1
under the consideration of subjects. 	1
under the direction of the archbishop of St. Andrew's, with 	1
under the dominion of the Romans, and that of the 	1
under the imperfect and ill-adjusted system of govern- 	1
Under the influence of these opinions, many protestants 	1
Under the long reign of heathenism, superstition seems 	1
under the paternal roof. In the month of October of 	1
under the queen regent's administration, a. d. 1556, a pound weight of 	1
under the queen's own eye d , she framed her instructions ct * ' 	1
Under these circumstances, and while the nation was Elizabeth's 	1
under various pretences, but was obliged at last to 	1
undisciplined courage of the private men became impa- 	1
unequal. The invading of England will immediately 	1
unexpected effort, to expel the French out of Britain, 	1
unexpected success, and his elevation to the highest 	1
unfavourable opinion of her actions ; and, for this 	1
unfeeling exactness, as appears from a series of letters from lord Hertford, 	1
unfortified town ; his own train consisted of no greater 	1
unfortunate, and her name odious. Devoted to the 	1
ungovernable spirit. All her attention to place about 	1
unhappiness to the observation of so many foreigners, 	1
unhappy. 	1
unhappy condition; melancholy and despair deprived 	1
union between the two kingdoms was negotiating, this 	1
union. The king was not only stripped of the autho- 	1
union was converted into a natural one ; men willingly 	1
union was null from the beginning d . At the same time 	1
union, which must have been established on the ruins 	1
union with the protestants, or in compliance with the 	1
united, under one monarchy, all the country, from the 	1
universally known, her ears were officiously filled, as is 	1
universal. Such a confederacy might be overcome, it 	1
UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 	1
university now stands. Such a situation, on a rising- 	1
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA 	1
university of Edinburgh : he was then little more than 	1
unjustifiable actions were imputed to the facility, not 	1
unjust, in order to dissolve it. 	1
unknown. The latter, while nothing was decided, were 	1
unless certain lords who attended the queen were dis- 	1
unmolested; and, on her approach, they were forced 	1
unnatural ambition, if we may believe most of our his- 	1
unobserved or unpublished. It was my duty to search 	1
unpitied solitude 8 . 	1
unto you may reach conveniently ; not forgetting, amongst all the rest, so 	1
unusual height ; and the inroads and rapine of those 	1
Unwilling, however, to abandon the citizens to the 	1
uonbothof queen. Mary had full leisure and opportunity to dis- 	1
UonofThe ^ ew ^ avs a ^ ter ' discovered a greater disposition to gra- 	1
up before her a standard, on which was painted the 	1
up dark points, correcting errours, and removing pre- 	1
up enemies at home to obstruct it. Lennox had, during 	1
upon any inducement, condescend to witness an action 	1
upon France. Perhaps, by gaining possession of this 	1
upon her. While the French coast continued in sight, 	1
upon his life, and who had resided for some tune in 	1
upon his natural timidity, and sweetened by every pro- 	1
upon illustrious characters, ought to be appropriated 	1
upon it, for their falsehood and disloyalty. Do what you can out of hand, 	1
upon it . The persons constituted judges in all these 	1
upon such daring measures as suited their great cou- 	1
upon that of the civil government. When the Christian 	1
upon the death of Henry the eighth, contributed no 	1
upon the enemy between Restalrig and Leith, with 	1
upon their families. In Keith's catalogue of the Scottish bishops, we find 	1
upon their order, that, notwithstanding Robert's po- 	1
upon the liberties of the nation, he, though an avowed 	1
upon the proposal the name of a ' devout imagination,' 	1
upon the regent, and pretended a right to exclude him, 	1
upon the rights of the aristocracy excited indignation, 	1
upon these persecutors of himself and of the religion 	1
upon the throne of Scotland, and compelled the nobles 	1
upon the validity of a sentence of divorce, founded on 	1
upon those of his own tribe or family. These all held 	1
upon, was finally abandoned, I have not been able to 	1
upper sort may be the nether, and not one ' stoke' stand upon another, sparing 	1
upstart. 	1
urged Elizabeth to produce it. Mary would have suf- 	1
urged, on the other, by the feelings which were na- 	1
urgently induced to add to the purity of composition 	1
usage, might have disposed mankind to entertain senti- 	1
us a proper idea of the character of the French court 	1
used, as might have convinced her to what an unfavour- 	1
used every expedient to evade this journey to London, yet it 	1
used for vindicating him from any concern in the mur- 	1
usual appearance alarmed those who were present. 	1
usual appearance of prosperity, that she never doubted 	1
usual candour, that the Scots declared war against the queen regent, rather . 	1
usual effect on her heart, they confirmed her passion, 	1
usual in such cases, with groundless or aggravated ac- 	1
usually fix their residence. By retiring to his own 	1
usually softens us in favour of illustrious sufferers. 1567. 	1
usual retinue of William, the sixth earl of Douglas, 	1
usual scene. The queen, worn out with fatigue, 	1
usual security and happiness under his administration: 	1
usurped and oppressive jurisdiction of the spiritual 	1
us with an air of magnificence. Her rival, an inde- 	1
u The most considerable persons who joined Murray were, the duke of 	1
u Thuan. lib. xxiv. p. 462. Edit. Francof. 	1
utmost asperity of style, which indignation at their 	1
utmost care from her subjects. They seem, however, 	1
utmost excesses of violence were to be dreaded from 	1
utmost honour and respect, but took care to admit no 	1
utmost rigour of law, and reduced their power and for- 	1
utmost scorn". 	1
utmost sensibility ; and, added to the anguish of dis- 	1
utmost tranquillity. But the rage of the queen's ad- ^ Iar y' s ad ~ 	1
utmost warmth, and, by their numbers and authority, 	1
utterly abandoned, could carry on any criminal intrigue with Rizio. But 	1
utterly inconsistent with her views, and urged with 	1
vagant ambition would hardly entertain, and could 	1
vailed. Their boldest leaders, and those of most ap- 	1
validate and set aside. This threatening was accom- 	1
valid. The king's authority, and Murray's election, 	1
valuable present. The satisfaction which I should 	1
valuable work you are going to publish. The excellent work 	1
valued, that, except one or two instances, it lay neglect- 	1
value of ecclesiastical benefices, throughout the king- 	1
vanced. But, wherever they came, the people joined 	1
vanced towards the enemy in three great bodies, and, 	1
vances to James the fifth, flattering the vanity of the 	1
vancing towards Edinburgh, at the head of eight thou- 	1
vanguard, endeavoured to change his ground, and to 	1
Vanity and resentment were the great springs of all his 	1
vantage. If Henry aimed at the conquest of Scotland, 	1
vantage ot 	1
vantages rendered Charles the first prince in Europe ; 	1
various arts ; and with the regent himself, in order to 	1
vassal, between landlord and tenant, created dependen- 	1
vassal followed his superior, and the superior attended 	1
vassals by proclamation, and solicited them by her let- ~ 	1
vassals to shake off his yoke. 	1
vassals, who, in every contest, espoused their chieftain's 	1
vate f . Her aversion for him increased every day, and 	1
vate inheritances, to the succession of the kingdom ; 	1
vate men, have been ransacked by the zeal and cu- 	1
vened, and many difficulties have arisen, before every 	1
vengeance ; but the providence of his friends enabled 	1
vengeance which his attention to the affairs of the con- 	1
vengeance, which the impotent hand of the magistrate 	1
veniently. Sack Leith, and subvert it, and all the rest, putting man, wo- 	1
vent any impression the rebels might make on those 	1
vented Albany's receiving any aid from England, the 	1
vented, by some of those unforeseen accidents, which 	1
vented by w j^jj wn ich it was attended, or upon the consequences 	1
vented it from being of long continuance. Both took 	1
vented them, for more than three weeks, from advanc- 	1
vention, and made her study every method of gaining subjects. 	1
vention can reach that end, to render their possessions 	1
vent this much-dreaded repeal, which has been repre- 	1
ventured, in the present critical juncture, to write a 	1
venture on the last action, towards which all his ambi- 	1
venture to do so without bringing disgrace upon her- isee. 	1
venture to imprison their sovereign for life, and to seize the reins of govern- 	1
venty-first year. 	1
venues ; Bonot was appointed governor of Orkney ; 	1
venues could be applied towards the maintenance of 	1
venues of our kings prevented them from fortifying, or 	1
venueYo'f ^ ew days, t ^ ie ancient system of religion, which had been 	1
veral ages. Charles succeeded to all the dominions of 	1
veral offices of trust and of dignity ; a step which, both ministration 	1
veral times, to enter England, to the borders of which 	1
veral years before any work of mine on the same sub- 	1
vere, and the regulations concerning property more 	1
vered since the first publication of my book. These additions 	1
vereign, it being almost impracticable to lead an army, 	1
vereignty to which the former had pretended. 	1
vereign, without previously ascertaining that he might 	1
verity towards a queen, who implored, and to whom 	1
vernment, became supreme and incontrollable. By this 	1
vernor ; nor yet justice, or any good policy, doth take place among them ; 	1
Versailles, is one of the most curious scenes I ever yet passed 	1
versal admiration, the elegance and politeness of her 	1
versal ; after the progress of learning and philosophy 	1
versal anarchy prevailed. The weak were exposed to 	1
versal defection from the established church would be 	1
versally reputed the murderer of her husband, to enjoy 	1
versal monarchy. His genius was of that kind which 	1
version of the twelve books of Marcus Aurelius, which 	1
versity of St. Andrew's ; a gentleman, says Mr. Stewart, (from whose life of 	1
verted rights, were, during a long period, neither ca- 	1
verted the nature of true Christianity ; besides the zeal 	1
very acceptable present which you were pleased to send me. 	1
very barons were tlje persons whom he chiefly dreaded ; 	1
very being of a parliament. But, in opposition to this 	1
very confident assurances of public encouragement, if I 	1
very far advanced ; but the subject has already grown so much 	1
very men, whom formerly they had swayed with abso- 	1
very probable that France and Spain would before this 	1
very refreshing to an author,) you may tell him that lord 	1
very well received. The Epigoniad I cannot so much promise 	1
very well written, is by far too faint an expression, and 	1
vested in the bishop of the diocese, after paying his 	1
vested Terouenne, France attempted to divide his forces, 	1
veterate enemies ; she had seen a powerful army under 	1
veyed to the regent, and he paid so much regard to it, 	1
viate every danger apprehended. These gentlemen 	1
viate sickness and pain. At this juncture, she did not 	1
vices were fallen upon for raising money. Fines were 	1
vice to Mary's cause 3 . 	1
vice which is natural to a virtuous mind. The king's 	1
victory at Langside. That event was of the utmost the queen's 	1
vided ; and, while they suffered intolerable oppression, 	1
vie, and the northern clans, were soon expected ; her 	1
view at Edinburgh, but with no better success. That 	1
view be- o f entering into a more intimate correspondence and 	1
viewed it in that light. After reciting, " that the queen, since her arrival, 	1
view ; for, by demolishing the monasteries throughout 	1
view, in an address to the regent, representing, in the 	1
view in the castle of Edinburgh, and, notwithstanding 	1
views of personal advantage ; and that, without extraor- 	1
views of the j egs success f u l than daring ; but all their schemes were 	1
Views of the The views, however, with which the several parties 	1
views, who soothed all her passions, who watched and 	1
vigilance and rigour". The Scottish regent, threaten- 	1
vigorous understanding of the latter, delighting in bold 	1
vigour, and admitted into it new associates. Among 	1
vigour on her side. The success which attended the 	1
vigour, took measures for their own defence. Their 	1
VII. The calamities which befell our kings contri- The fre- 	1
vile, and municipal, with other constitutions, contrare to the religion now 	1
vilege, but a service 11 . It was exacted, likewise, of 	1
vilege of ' repledging,' remove the cause to his own 	1
vileges and power. They insisted, that the dauphin's 	1
Villages 243 	1
vinced him of their independence, and of the impo- 	1
vinced of his want of genius to improve an opportunity, 	1
vince of the kingdom, and ready to burst out with all 	1
vinces, and furnished both materials and hints for a 	1
vincial clergyman his exertions were confined to a nar- 	1
vincible resolution, which, together with their superi- 	1
vindicate her government from those imputations with 	1
vindicate her honour, by a reply to the charge, they had 	1
vindicate his own innocence, in single combat with 	1
vindication from those illegal and criminal designs, with 	1
vine legislator himself, accommodating his dispensations 	1
vingston, lord Boyd, lord Herries, Gavin Hamilton, 	1
violations of the marriage vow, encroachments on her 	1
violence", is one of those singular circumstances in the 	1
violence of faction, rendered it an easy matter to divide 	1
violence of resentment, they forgot that zeal for the in- 	1
violence of the flame which the discussion of this sub- 	1
violent and deep-rooted, that it was no longer in her 	1
violent and impolitic. By long residence in Scotland, 	1
Violent as this action may appear, there wanted not 	1
violent attempts against it. 	1
violently to wrest the power out of the hands of the 	1
violent measures ; and, by representing the power and 	1
violent rupture, and employed all her influence to bring 	1
vion, the nomination of twenty-four persons, out of 	1
VIOUS TO THE DEATH OF JAMES THE FIFTH. 	1
virtue, and political discernment, were equally necessary 	1
virtues of others. His rapaciousness, his profusion, 	1
viscount Royston, his lordship was so good as to allow 	1
visible in every part of her character, and runs through 	1
visible ; they seconded the military operations of the 	1
visions ; and, therefore, besides punishing the disaffec- 	1
visit of three or four months now and then to England 	1
visit. They had trusted that the French war would 	1
visit to the king, which had been neglected, when his 	1
Vita Card. Laur. ap. Burn. vol. iii. p. 325. 	1
vi THE ,LIFE OF 	1
vitt THE LIFE OF 	1
vive her and the children born of the marriage p . This 	1
viz. the violation of the treaty of Perth by Mary of Guise, 	1
v Johnston, Hist. Rer. Britan. 346, 347. Carte, voL iii. 699. Catalogue 	1
v Keith, 387. 395, 396. 	1
vocates for the English alliance, and a reformation in 	1
vocations of other countries. I shall, therefore, insert 	1
voices in the senate, the same cause, which they had 	1
voice will be drowned in that of the public. 	1
void, and depriving Dunbar of the earldom. Many of 	1
void. Bothwell, on the other hand, insisted that the 	1
voke them, by a fruitless opposition, to become her 	1
vol. i. 189. 	1
vol. i. 56. The queen's warrant to the 'messengers,' empowering them to 	1
VOL. I. A a 	1
VOL. i. b 	1
VOL. I. B b 	1
VOL. i. c 	2
VOL. I. C C 	1
VOL. i. d 	1
VOL. I. D 	1
VOL. I. D d 	1
VOL. i. e 	1
VOL. i. E 	1
VOL. I. F 	1
VOL. I, G 	1
VOL. I. H 	1
VOL. I. I 	1
vol. ii. 358. 	1
vol. ii. 97. He was summoned by public proclamation at the cross of 	1
VOL. I. K 	1
VOL. I. L 	1
VOL. I. M 	1
VOL. I. O 	1
VOL. I. P 	1
vol. i. p. 125, etc. 	1
vol. i. p. 389. 	1
VOL. I. Q 	1
VOL. I. R 	1
VOL. I. S 	1
VOL. i. T 	1
VOL. i. u 	1
VOL. I. X 	1
VOL. I. Y 	1
VOL. I. Z 	1
VOL. r. N 	1
VOLUME I. 	1
volumes (three, I am afraid) of this laborious work, yet I 	1
volved his whole authority upon his favourites. So 	1
volves in itself the most important events of modern 	1
vorce, which would remove the only obstacle that stood 	1
vost of the town, who hath much ado to stay them from assaulting me in my 	1
vouchers for my own veracity. None of these, as far 	1
vourable light, and to rouse the public indignation 	1
vourable to the opinions which they professed. 	1
vour, and to obtain a pardon for his son. Knox, 318. 2. He met the 	1
vour, and who filled that place at the helm, which he 	1
voured to engage him in an alliance against England. 	1
voured to gain the most powerful and active barons, by 	1
voured to guard against division, and to cement together 	1
voured to lessen his influence, and to scatter among 	1
voured to procure subsistence for himself and his fol- 	1
voured to secure these blessings to his subjects, he dis- 	1
vourites, and hardly any but them approached his person, 	1
vourites, those great qualities were less conspicuous. 	1
vourites was both dishonourable and dangerous to a 	1
vours Ma- successful. We may ascribe, in a good degree, to their 	1
vous et a M. Hume qu'il appartient d'ecrire 1'histoire. 	1
Vous etes eloquent, savant, et impartial. Je me joins 	1
voyage" 1 . But, while she was preparing for it, there 	1
V. Those natural connexions, both with their equals Their 	1
V,V 	1
w 	1
Wales. But what will really give you pleasure, I lent my 	1
Wallace, a hero, to whom the fond admiration of his 	1
wall of Adrian, to the northern ocean. The kingdom, 	1
wanted a great deal of the necessary length ; and the 	1
wanted but little of regal dignity, and nothing of regal 	1
wanting to confirm the king's authority, and the pro- 	1
want means to ensure success. Mary had endured, for 1567. 	1
want of affection to his family, deprived him of the right of succession. 	1
want of a proper leader, made it dangerous to concert 	1
want of strength. Necessity and self-preservation led 	1
wants that readiness of application which, in general 	1
war, and the danger of conquest. Nothing, therefore, 	1
warcUthat" so ^ ast through the nation, merit, on that account, a 	1
ward and peevish ; and, scrupling to enter the palace, 	1
warden of the west marches, and sir Francis Knollys, 	1
ward in quest of truth; the discovery of one errour open- 	1
ward of this unworthy combination with the enemies of 	1
wards bringing the differences between herself and her 	1
wards declined to do so. But whoever considers Murray's situation, and 	1
wards Dunbarton, there was an eminence called Lang- 	1
wards joining with the enemy, they cling and thrust so near in the fore 	1
wards replacing her on the throne. As Mary's con- 	1
wards the close of his reign, the princes of Lorrain 	1
wards the close of the seventeenth century before it 	1
wards the downfal of popery, and the establishment of 	1
wards the king had been undutiful and criminal y . Their 	1
wards the son. They placed him instantly on the 	1
wards the south or north, that their manners have been 	1
wards vigour and expedition in conduct; the danger 	1
wards your accession to the throne, not only without 	1
ward the fourth of England, in which he assumed the 	1
war have shown that the author was not quite so hasty 	1
wark of the protestant cause ; and he had reduced that 	1
warm ; books of that kind were eagerly read by men of 	1
warmly in his behalf. The latter, though she began 	1
warned Mary of the danger and infamy to which she 	1
warrant from the queen was produced, by which they were allowed to do 	1
wars and revolutions occasioned by their exorbitant 	1
wars of Francis the first, arrived at Leith. They served 	1
war, under the active reigns of Francis the first and 	1
war, was not only exposed to that calamity, but almost 	1
War was the sole profession of the nobles, and hunting 	1
Warwick, their leader, no less ambitious but more art- 	1
was accompanied with proportionable weight in the 	1
was again summoned to court, under the severest pe- 	1
was a general one, that did not require the minute accuracy 	1
was almost entirely annihilated ; and the aristocratical 	1
was always my desire, and was most suitable to the friend- 	1
was a man of superior genius. These served the king 	1
was a mere forgery ; and on different occasions had 	1
was an intolerable grievance. Barons sometimes denied 	1
was an object of uniform and anxious attention to all 	1
was an odious task. To fail in this accusation was 	1
was appropriated for their maintenance ''. 	1
was appropriated to a sacred use. The nobles held 	1
was a scheme concerted by Murray, in order to ruin the earl of Huntly. 	1
was at least more frequent among them, than in any 	1
was, at present, the only sufferer, the precedent might 	1
was attached to the English interest, and to encourage 	1
was, at that time, only in her eighteenth year ; and as 	1
was a warning against contracting a marriage with the 	1
was burnt to the ground ; another chapel for catholics 	1
was called the ' courtesy of Scotland.' The French 	1
was called, to 'modify' their stipends. An hundred 	1
was capable of the utmost tenderness of affection. She 	1
was carried in a litter to Edinburgh. 	1
was carried on with most shameless partiality, and ac- 	1
was carrying on; and gave his court repeated assur- 	1
was chiefly distinguished? Are you versed in all the anec- 	1
was circumscribed within very narrow limits. 	1
was concealed by Scott of Buccleugh and Ker of Fer- 	1
was conducted with furious animosity and various suc- 	1
was conferred upon his cousin, the duke of Albany, a 	1
was considered ; and, of fifty-one members present, only seven voted to 	1
was daily introducing in the art of war, rendered the 	1
was dangerously wounded by sir John. The magis- 	1
was declared to be accessory to the murder of the 	1
was deemed an act of apostacy, and the toleration of a 	1
was deeply tinctured with the protestant opinions ; and if 	1
was deprived of his pay, and the person who was most 	1
was designed for him. Mary, when she subscribed 	1
was destroyed in a similar way: their fury against 	1
was determined. It seems to have been the intention 	1
was disastrous, as well as his end tragical. Under the 	1
was distrustful of the Scots, and studious to preserve 	1
was due to men, who, out of confidence in her promises, 	1
was eagerly laid hold on ; but the privilege was so little 	1
was easy to observe new storms gathering in every pro- 	1
was entirely under the direction of his rivals, it was im- 	1
was excessive. He felt himself engaged in an unneces- 	1
was exercised with too little moderation, to be of long 	1
was exposed, at that time, seemed to require k . What 	1
was exposed, on account of his familiarity with such an 	1
was extremely corpulent, was trodden to death in the 	1
was far from being rich. In this exigency, many de- 	1
was far from gratifying the wishes, or silencing the 	1
was feared, must terminate a dispute too weighty for 	1
was first introduced in this manner. An innovation, 	1
was formed into a bill, and presented to parliament ; and 	1
was formed of murdering him at Perth, and mentions various circumstances 	1
was formerly mere usurpation. Many vestiges of such 	1
was founded on the words of the treaty of Edinburgh. que! 	1
was given by the act of last session to popish ecclesi- 	1
was graciously received both by the king and queen : 	1
was greatly interrupted, and the execution of any legal 	1
was growing among all ranks of men. 	1
wash away an affront ; where that was not shed, their 	1
was heard with pleasure, every appearance of guilt was 	1
was held, chiefly on account of ecclesiastical affairs. 	1
was imitated by his successors. The spirit spread 	1
was impatient to bring every quarrel to the decision of 	1
was impossible to resist such a temptation. He yielded, ~ 	1
was in a condition to dispute it. The affection of the 	1
was inattentive to none of these circumstances. The 	1
was inconsistent with all his views. This would bring 	1
was inferior to no man of that intriguing age in all the 	1
was interrupted by a new proposal, which, as it origi- 	1
was in that age fierce and unrelenting. Mary had 	1
was James Hepburn, earl of Bothwell, the head of an 	1
was kept back by a promise, which, though sacred to 	1
was laying before the government of his country a fair 	1
was left for deliberation, they instantly erected their 	1
was likewise absent from court. He arrived there, how- 	1
was little known, and less regarded. The licence of 	1
was long preserved. The scales were poized by very 	1
was made use of to secure the lords of articles for the crown. The temporal 	1
was making a great noise in Europe. He is a very fine 	1
was Mary, with whom Norfolk held a correspondence, 	1
was mean; to forbear revenge, infamous or cowardly" 1 . 	1
was more an exercise of the judgment, than of the 	1
was most apparent ; and the consequences of it most 	1
was natural for a mother to demand, had implored 	1
was no injury to which the presumption of success 	1
was no less respectful to the royal blood, than necessary 	1
was no less unfortunate. The French sent out a de- 	1
was no proof of it : for though that statute contains a statute 	1
was not able to derive sufficient benefits from them, or indeed 	1
was not an advantage to be put in competition with 	1
was not Elizabeth's intention to weaken or to set aside 	1
was not fixed to any particular place ; many parts of 	1
was not levied even on land: such a burthen would 	1
was not so sufficient as the matter required." Keith, App. 109. He was, 	1
was not their sole object. They aimed at bringing 	1
was now apparent, that not only the religion, but the 	1
was now at her disposal. 	1
was now driven from her presence. The murderers of 	1
was now entirely dissolved ; and love no longer covering creases. 	1
was now fully established. But he began too soon to 	1
was now in a declining state, and her mind broken and 	1
was obliged to have recourse to the nobles, for the de- 	1
was often carried incredibly far, contributed not a little 	1
was often no less formidable to him, than to his ene- 	1
was one degree nearer the royal blood of England than 	1
was out of all danger. 	1
was over, and the king, though weak and languishing, 	1
was owing to a seasonable remittance from England d , 	1
was owing to his connexion with the house of Hamil- 	1
was perfectly conformable to her secret views. They 	1
was pleased to give me. 	1
was possessed by the popish incumbents, a race of men 	1
was presented to the living of Gladsmuir in East Lo- 	1
was punctually granted him, and the duke of Glouces- 	1
was put in possession of the kingdom, to swear fealty 	1
was put to Randolph, Whether the governor of Berwick would receive 	1
was raised by considerations of religion, heightened by 	1
was received is well known ; on this occasion, as before 	1
was several days before he thought of pursuing her \ 	1
was. She dissembled, however, with the English resi- 	1
was so jealous and so apt to take offence, that her most confidential minis- 	1
was soon known at Dunbar. The queen, regulating 	1
was still alive, ought to be considered as illegitimate. Crawf. Peer. 192. 	1
was still more, by proposing to send her immediately 	1
was still more destitute of real authority ; and the pros- 	1
was stripped, were points hard to be gained. These, 	1
was such as not to suffer them to escape him : he re- 	1
was sufficient for all the purposes both of the security 	1
was suggested by the perusal of major Rennet's me- 	1
was supported by a powerful faction. Arms alone, it 	1
waste all the adjacent country". The zeal, however, 	1
was the behaviour of the convocation in the present 	1
was the duke of Albany, a native of France, and a 	1
was the effect of their union. Charles endeavoured 	1
was the interest of the French to suffer the war in Scot- 	1
was the natural consequence of their small number; and 	1
was then six years old, and by her education in that 	1
was then too diffident of myself, and too idle to make 	1
was the object of the English fleet to intercept Mary. This, however, seems 	1
was the occasion of his leaving that place in an abrupt 	1
was the son of Isabel, earl David's second daughter ; 	1
was the valour, no less than the number of their fol- 	1
was to be elected; and every other thing, prescribed 	1
was to carry Darnly a prisoner into England ; the proposal made to Ran- 	1
was to ecclesiastics, a delegate appeared in name of the clerical courts, and 	1
was to pass, in his way from Stirling to Edinburgh. 	1
was to regain their favour. Nor was this reconcilement 	1
was trusted with no power. Avoided equally by those 	1
was urgent, and, by losing a single moment, might be- 	1
was wanting to gratify the public wish by his destruc- 	1
was watched more narrowly than ever ; and Hastings, 	1
was weak enough to suffer himself to be persuaded ; 	1
was what Mary chiefly dreaded. Henry's retiring into 	1
was withdrawn or despised. The English, of enemies 	1
watch all her motions, and to take care that she should 	1
wavering faith of the people, was equally imprudent 	1
way, I conjectured from some scattered words to have been 	1
ways got your corrected sheets from Strahan ; and am glad to 	1
way to the most immoderate transports of joy, on the 	1
weak and unexperienced prince ; but, as the charms of 	1
weaken or divide her adversaries. By private solicita- 	1
weaken that of the prince. Wherever numbers of men 	1
we already mentioned with the earl of Crawford and 	1
wealth, a considerable share of the public taxes were 	1
wealth ; and the authority which they acquired, by the 	1
wealth, were desirous that the stain of illegitimacy might no longer remain 	1
wealthy barons remained with their preachers at Edin- 	1
weapon was a long spear, and, for that reason, their 	1
wearied and joyless industry. Francis could mingle 	1
we discover in James all the features of a great, but 	1
weeks, the regent, in compliance to the English am- 	1
We find, accordingly, in a very rare edition of the acts of parliament, im- 	1
we have hitherto avoided, will abundantly explain this 	1
we have no opportunity of judging, the attention of the 	1
we hear no more of the insurrection, nor have we any proof that the rioters 	1
weight of silver, when coined, produced nine pounds two shillings ; but in 	1
weight with ministers, factious leaders, and favourites. 	1
weighty, at that time, makes no impression on me at 	1
welcome and regard. But, as her arrival was unex- 	1
welfare, as well as attention to their own safety, ren- 	1
well acquainted with his resolution of humbling thje no- 	1
well, a marriage concluded in that condition might be 	1
well as authority, were employed to persuade, or to 	1
well as the scourges of mankind, were commonly, under 	1
well as the truth which they contained, made a deep 	1
well, beloved country, which I shall never more be- 	1
well ; but, as time might bring to light the circumstances 	1
well continued as violent as ever; she obstinately re- 	1
well, fully accounts for every subsequent part of her 	1
well is named as one of the commissioners for carrying it into execution, 	1
well known for his style in French, and his knowledge in the 	1
well miss of coming to an happy issue. All those who 	1
well nigh proved, fatal to the independence of Scotland ; 	1
well q ; and some reflections were thrown out, &lt;-&gt;s if the 1567 	1
well's account, threw her next morning into a violent 	1
wells, and had not his marriage changed a little the state of 	1
well's guilt there remains the fullest evidence that the 	1
well's,-may be supposed to steal imperceptibly on a 	1
well, that it was impossible to force them to give battle ; 	1
well, they now obtained. An act was passed in this 	1
well was of equal weight in both courts. In the course 	1
well were in a condition,to resist them. The castle of 	1
well, with a numerous train of his dependents, con- 	1
we may presume, was, at first, only a temporary grant, 	1
We often find Mary boasting of the superiority in 	1
were able so to temper their heat and zeal, that few of 	1
were able to trace the progress of society only within 	1
were accompanied to the place of trial by a retinue of 	1
were accustomed to arms, and, on the least prospect 	1
were a contradiction to reason, and a disgrace to reli- 	1
were admitted into favour, or intended as a proof of 	1
were all excessive. Nor were these weaknesses confined 	1
were altogether superficial and showy, appeared to 	1
were among the number of Norfolk's confidents. They 	1
were, and animated with a spirit superior to the low 	1
were appointed to put it in execution. Abbeys, cathe- 	1
were, at all other times, scrupulously delicate. 	1
were, at this fresh instance of his inconstancy, she was 	1
were become by that time, attached to the court, these, it is obvious, would 	1
were bound in honour to adopt and to prosecute it with 	1
were broken at Pinkey ; and in an assembly of nobles 	1
were brought to acknowledge the king's authority, that 	1
were called * leagues of mutual defence ;' and when with 	1
were commanded instantly to destroy it ; and if, through 	1
were condemned to that dreadful death, which the 	1
were convicted by sufficient evidence. If we give credit 	1
were delivered by the death of Francis ; the ancient 	1
were empowered to declare the queen guilty, by a ju- 	1
were empowered to inspect the life and doctrine of the 	1
were enforced, added to their authority. A sentence 	1
were equal to the greatest of these ; nor did he reckon 	1
were firmly attached to a rival, whom she had good rea- 	1
were fond of an alliance, which afforded protection to 	1
were foreseen at a greater distance, and prevented with 	1
were found lying in an adjacent garden without the 	1
were gained by the nobility in, that way : and to these 	1
were gained to his party, and a faction, which held 	1
we regard either the barbarity of that age, when such 	1
were hardly secure from the unbridled insolence of the 	1
were heard of in ours. x Burgesses were first admitted A. D. 1326. 	1
were in the gift of the crown x . From the time of her 	1
were in their hands, they felt their own strength ; and, 	1
were killed in the fray ; and the French were obliged to 	1
were listened to with proportional credit. 	1
were men, at that time, to the spirit of toleration, and to 	1
were more eminent for their skill in law, their rules of 	1
were murdered in France and Scotland, on account 	1
were necessary, the clergy were intrusted; because they 	1
were no less advantageous to them. Monluc and Ran- 	1
were no less favourable to the progress of the same 	1
were not accustomed. Provoked by his haughtiness, 	1
were not matters of tedious or of difficult discussion. 	1
were not so obvious. The French ambassadors consi- 	1
were not unconcerned spectators of an event which 	1
were now encouraged out of policy. The enraged mul- 	1
were now taught to consider .as alienations made by 	1
were obstacles to the elevation of her sister Elizabeth, 	1
were only skirmishes at a distance, of no consequence 	1
were only two ways of obtaining. Either violence must 	1
were planted behind the infantry, on the highest part 	1
were pleased to lead him. The power of France, under 	1
were powerful motives which prompted him at this 	1
were present, not excepting Bruce and Baliol, the com- 	1
were prohibited, and those obtained since the death of 	1
were promised him, and the liberal subsidies he might 	1
were quickly joined by them and several other of the 	1
were quickly removed. A satisfying answer was given 	1
were raised, and great taxes imposed for their sub- 	1
were rebuked by their respective presbyteries, and one 	1
were recognised and confirmed. The imprisoning the 	1
were regarded by the credulous laity, as beings of a 	1
were reserved for their own use, the remainder was 	1
were Robertson, Smith, and Blair ; but after two num- 	1
were seldom raised to "that dignity. It was often con- 	1
were sent out against him by the confederates ; and, 	1
were soon confirmed by a circumstance extremely mor- 	1
were sown between her and Elizabeth the seeds of that 	1
were still prisoners at London. Among the rest of the 	1
were still the duke's prompters, and his agents ; and 	1
were strangers to the fatigues of a long campaign, and 	1
were summoned, for this reason, to repair to court. 	1
were supplied with greater facility in the one kingdom 	1
were taken into custody by Elizabeth's orders, on ac- 	1
were the duke of Chatelherault, and his eldest son, the 	1
were the effects of their conjunct authority, and each 	1
were the heads of this confederacy . Stewart, earl of 	1
were the History of Greece and that of Charles the 	1
were then little esteemed. The nobles beheld the 	1
were the only thing which remained to embarrass him. 	1
were the queen's commissioners for conducting the ne- 	1
were the same with the duke's, to vindicate his own 	1
were to be laid before the parliament. There was rarely 	1
were universal, while government was unsettled, and 	1
were unjustifiable, but that she herself was conscious 	1
were unwilling to expose themselves to the odium and 1568. 	1
were used, not without success, to represent them all 	1
were usually terminated by the sword. The offended 	1
were wonderfully elevated. Maitland was the soul of 	1
were yet arrived, the baptism of the prince was put ofF^ fo r e [h e 	1
were zealous, fierce, and irreconcilable. The absence 	1
we shall often have occasion to refer. The right of 	1
western counties. But Mary's vigilance hindered them 	1
west, Keith, 312, prevented this expedition, and the former rendezvous was 	1
Westmorland, the most powerful noblemen in that part 	1
wfhEng- 8 ^ anc * P roy ed another cause of augmenting the power of 	1
what apology to offer for her conduct, called on her to 	1
what course to hold. The queen observed his irreso- makes her 	1
whatever object their ambition might have in view, 	1
Whatever opinion posterity may form on comparing 	1
whatever place he pleased to name. Their jurisdiction 	1
Whatever resentment Mary might feel, it did not Mary begins 	1
whatever satisfaction their fear or jealousy could de- In^^ar- 	1
Whatever thoughts of this kind the presumption of 	1
what happened in France. The feebleness and dotage of the descendants 	1
what he had seized on by fraud. But Beatoun had 	1
what he had taught ; and upon this general doctrine of 	1
What he himself had suffered from the exorbitant 	1
what his virtue did not merit ; titles of honour became 	1
what is more remarkable, by the laws of those ages. If any person thought 	1
what is true, and what is fabulous, in the early part of our 	1
what it was to be deprived of liberty, and dreaded it 	1
what light and force this history of the Tudors bestows on 	1
what may seem altogether incredible, the most limited 	1
what number of French forces were then in Scotland, 	1
what seemed chiefly to alarm my brethren who were 	1
what she had formerly used, and which fully discovers 	1
What then could be gained, by rousing this dangerous 	1
what they apprehend ; and submit to many arbitrary 	1
what they deemed the cause of God and of their coun- 	1
what they possessed. The king's ' demesnes,' or the 	1
what vast projects the French had founded on their 	1
what was controverted, the public must judge. 	1
What were the arguments, by which Henry brought 	1
what would be the extent of the danger, and what 	1
when applied to, said, that since the pension had once been 	1
when at last it was determined that the city should be 	1
whence the queen derived some supply. About this 	1
when deprived of the genius and authority of so skilful 	1
when he applied to him for relief; but it was his know- 	1
When Hugh Capet ascended the throne, a. d. 987, he kept possession of his 	1
WHEN I express my strong hope that you will visit Lon- 	1
when it was discovered by the vigilance of the bishop 1570. 	1
when it was so necessary for his preservation. A king, 	1
When Mary consented to submit her cause to Eliza- 1568. 	1
when once men have been accustomed to break through 	1
When parliaments became more numerous, and more considerable, by the 	1
When she saw the army, which was her last hope, 	1
when she yielded herself a prisoner, they, without re- 157. 	1
When the conspirators against Rizio seized her person, 	1
when the infuriated multitude were meditating the de- 	1
When their own industry, or the superstition of man- 	1
when the lesser barons and representatives of boroughs 	1
when the violence of religious animosities had begun 	1
when they renounced their alliance with him, had en- 	1
whereas beauty and gracefulness of person, polished 	1
where he hath held the first, may well pass for a wild 	1
wherein he has inserted many papers of consequence, 	1
wherein she tells them, that, if they thought proper, they 	1
whereof were deeply felt, and operated powerfully 	1
where riches did not abound, had been able to supply. 	1
where she had once enjoyed all the splendour of a~ 	1
where the choice would fall. The two former, were 	1
where the feudal institutions prevailed, most of the 	1
where the house belonging to the principal of the 	1
where the queen's name was employed, yet that is always the 	1
where the regal authority was so extremely limited, and 	1
where the same manly zeal for truth. A new study, 	1
Wherever I think my sentiments right and well-established, 	1
wherewith proceeds from your partiality to dean Swift, 	1
whether the new narrative could be brought within the same 	1
whether they should employ their whole strength, in 	1
whHi you so politely desired Mr. Strahan to send me. 	1
which a captive prince is reduced. She uttered the 	1
which added to his infamy. He armed a few small 	1
which affected themselves alone with astonishing pa- 	1
which allured his enterprising genius, and led him to 	1
which all were obliged to submit, because none of them 	1
which alone she attended in choosing her ministers ; 	1
which, among martial nobles, was either unknown or 	1
which anciently covered all the north of Europe, the 	1
which any person who resided on the lands of the no- 	1
which appeared so momentous to our ancestors, cannot 	1
which are now held sacred. 1564 	1
which are nowhere else to be found. This history has 	1
which are so well calculated to please the malignity of 	1
which a siege requires. The queen's emissaries, who 	1
which, at such a distance of time, is of no importance, called in 	1
which attend me at Paris, I must mention that of having a 	1
which, at the beginning of the present century, went 	1
which at this time she gave her assent. Mary s attach- t h e re f or . 	1
which befell her, prevented the revival of such a mo- 	1
which Boyd had been at so much pains to acquire, was 	1
which, by their arbitrary method of proceeding, found-"" 	1
which, by unforeseen expedients, can secure the peace 	1
which called for more wisdom in council, or more cou- ^?f Ume at 	1
which came from a princess of such a false and unfeel- 	1
which can open to you in Scotland, and which, I be- 	1
which con- opinions into Scotland, and which disseminated them 	1
which could not be taken without a regular siege; a 	1
which descended to me from my ancestors, I will part 	1
which determined the one queen to solicit, and the 	1
which differs considerably from that of the clerical con- 	1
which discovers the extreme inaccuracy of those who 	1
which discover the great want of delicacy and refine- 	1
which drew the admiration of his contemporaries. As 	1
which Edward founded his title to the sovereignty of 	1
which Elizabeth desired to obstruct with a weakness 	1
which England, France, and Scotland were compre- 	1
which even the licentiousness of youth could not excuse, 	1
which flowed from so many concurring causes, which 	1
which formerly came under their cognizance, were trans- 	1
which for some days, and afterwards under the cover 	1
which gradually undermined his constitution, and ter- 	1
which had all the appearance of sincerity. She had 	1
which had animated their ancestors, in the reign of 	1
which had been put to the progress of the reforma- 	1
which had been the chief occasion of the war, the other 	1
which had gathered from different parts of the king- 	1
which had invaded Scotland, to retire, James imagined, 	1
which had so long been the object of his wishes, and 	1
which had spread over the rest of the nation. These 	1
which has since been denominated ' presbyterian.' The 	1
which he acted so conspicuous a part, hath provided 	1
which he attained it. Notwithstanding his great abili- 	1
which he formed into a regular history. His work was 	1
which he had at that time adopted. It contained no 	1
which he had entered, and to fetch a compass round 	1
which he had held many years. He obtained, however, to^^n" 1 	1
which he had obtained in his favour, as a full vindica- 	1
which he had received from the prior, during the hos- 	1
which he had received from the queen. The regent 	1
which he has for many years displaeyd in the ecclesiastical courts. 	1
which he obtained after publishing the History of 	1
which he produced publicly, brought others in ciphers 	1
which he professed ; and, as he passed through Eng- 	1
which her present situation demanded m . An event so 	1
which her reiterated promises gave them no reason to 	1
which her rival had acquired by the birth of a son, 	1
which, however, was very far from giving them satisfac- 	1
which, if we allow it to be genuine, it is impossible to 	1
which I had fallen with respect to this act, by supposing it to be so favour- 	1
which induced them to- depart so far from the ancient 	1
which in express terms was declared to be only a tem- 	1
which is exacted by the Romish church, prepares and 	1
which is natural to a free people in a martial age. 	1
which is worthy the magnificence of a great and po- 	1
which it deemed idolatrous. 	1
which it had been loaded, and employed the strongest 	1
which it had been so long restrained, and, venturing to 	1
which it might be attended f , the bulk of them desired 	1
which it was natural for them to pour upon the party 	1
which it was their duty to esteem sacred. They had 	1
which leaves a deeper stain than any occurrence in that 	1
which led men to reject theological errours, accom- 	1
which lies beyond the river Forth. But, upon finding 	1
which may serve to show the attention which great 	1
which met at Stirling to consult upon the situation of 	1
which might have proved fatal to his opponents, ended 	1
which might prove injurious to Mary's claim upon the 	1
which must have imposed on the author the necessity 	1
which never stain a truly great and generous character. 	1
which no former monarch ever possessed. 	1
which Norfolk placed them, it is easy to see that he 	1
which now begins to open. 	1
which occasioned, at first, so much joy among the 	1
which occurred, consumed much tune. Norfolk's ne- 	1
which occurred. The spirit and strength of the Scots 	1
which one summer's sun brings to their full growth, 	1
which operate most powerfully on the human mind. 	1
which our ancestors embraced, and propagated the 	1
which presented to him a very different scene. The 	1
which prevailed in Scotland, and the ambition of com- 	1
which prevails in Scotland, said the favourers of the 	1
which proceeded from no inward conviction ; the latter 	1
which remained was dissolved. Catherine of Medicis, 	1
which seldom fails of success. He mentioned to her 	1
which she appointed Gordon to be confined, were in- 	1
which she describes, and records them for the instruc- 	1
which she had afforded them, and, at the same tune, to 	1
which she had all along discovered for marriage, made 	1
which she had been encouraged to expect. They an- 	1
which she had charged them. On her part, Eliza- 	1
which she had discovered during the progress of the 	1
which she had hitherto received from Elizabeth, and 	1
which she had planned out, if her recommendation of 	1
which she obtained a considerable sum of money 8 . The 	1
which she stood, with part of their cavalry, was utterly 	1
which she violated the public faith, than at the danger 	1
which she was animated, upon hearing that the public ^ 	1
which she was obliged to give to the civil wars in~ 	1
which she would have added to the French monarchy ; 	1
which still remained untouched. The alteration in re- 	1
which subjects might invade those rights of the crown 	1
which such an example of unsuccessful ambition filled 	1
which the archbishop of St. Andrew's opposed all the 	1
which the crown had been unjustly bereaved ; and, for 	1
which the following " imperfect sketch," found among 	1
which the growing expense of government hath intro- 	1
which their arms had been accompanied, inspired 	1
which their former services had so little merited, and 	1
which their posterity solicit to be admitted ther?. In 	1
which the murder had been committed ; a circumstance 	1
which the nobles contended for the independence of 	1
which the other upheld with the same hand that had 	1
which the prior made to Melvil, of residing constantly 	1
which the professors might rest with greater confidence. 	1
which the queen was carrying on, exposed him so much 	1
which there are few examples in that age. But some 	1
which these great revolutions were effected, how vio- 	1
which the territories of Elizabeth could be approached. 	1
which they amidst their most violent operations, men always retain 	1
whichthey appearance, the rigour of justice took place, and they 	1
which they deemed of great importance to the king- 	1
which they disputed with more considerable princes. 	1
which they established was altogether military, and 	1
which they feel in common with the rest of mankind. 	1
which they formerly held during pleasure, their ambi- 	1
which they found to avail so little. Among the nobles, 	1
which they held them r . As this statute threatened the 	1
which they insisted, in their discourses to the people ; 	1
which they inspired for the knowledge of truth and the 	1
which they little expected. The Highland broadsword 	1
which they marched; and before they reached Falk- 	1
which they now held ; that the redress due to church- 	1
which they seized being cantoned out among power- 	1
which they suffered . 	1
which they were so happily united ; so the English na- 	1
which they were treated by many, from whom he ex- 	1
which, though inconsiderable, ought not to be over- 	1
which threatened themselves, prepared boldly for their 	1
which *thT tnat tin 16 * upon the great events which had happened 	1
which was blunt and open, he affected the arts of 	1
which was dispersed, rather than broken, by the late 	1
which was dubious, than to search for one that was 	1
which was fatally employed to disappoint the effects of France! and 	1
which was natural to her. The rashness and levity of 	1
which was not in the hands of the Douglases. The 	1
which was now established in the kingdom. On their 	1
which was of great advantage to their cause. Soothed 	1
which was to be held at Stirling, on the tenth of May. 	1
which we can depend, not from their own, but from 	1
which we may infer, that he was incited to study, not 	1
which were accessible by sea, he would have laid the 	1
which were, at that time, of great extent, into the hands 	1
which were disputed between the protestants and pa- 	1
which were examined, as appears from papers still ex- 	1
which were formed with regard to his death, were ex- 	1
which were frequent in that age, they had, in the course 	1
which were presented to them. The lords of articles, 	1
which were still in their hands. From whatever mo- 	1
which were upon the seas to cleanse them of pirates, saw her, [i. e. Mary,] 	1
which will end with the ruin of the western empire, is already 	1
which, with admirable policy, denounces its anathemas 	1
which wonderfully animated and revived them. The 	1
which would have rendered the aristocracy invincible, 	1
which would have seen the subversion of the feudal 	1
which would have set the conduct of the malecontents 	1
w hi cn s h e had hitherto affected. The secret was dis- 	1
While all parties were contending, who should dis- 	1
while he himself needed to be supported by two men, 	1
While his first work was in the press Dr. Robertson 	1
While Mary was endeavouring to reconcile foreign Darnly dis- 	1
While she advanced, by these slow, but sure, steps, 	1
while she held their principles in abhorrence ; and they 	1
While the English commissioners waited for fuller 	1
While the English court was occupied in these de- Proceedings 	1
While the hopes and courage of the French pro- 	1
While their minds were in this disposition, an in- 	1
while the popish clergy, under the influence of the 	1
While the queen dowager of Scotland contributed Reforma- 	1
While the Scots persisted in their inactivity, d'Oysel, 	1
While they were ruminating upon their scheme, the They corn- 	1
While this infamous transaction was carrying on, the 	1
whilst we carry on a poor unequal conflict with the 	1
who are acquainted with the human heart, and who 	1
who are called to the throne in their infancy, his edu- 	1
who attended him, seem to have considered it as an 	1
who became the principal authors of her sufferings ; 	1
who confined Bothwell, Arran, and a few of the ring- 	1
who could employ, in defence of her rights, the forces 	1
who do not feel the occasion, and enter into the spirit of the 	1
who during the minority of Charles the ninth, her se- 	1
who endeavoured to please the queen, who favoured 	1
who, ever since his father's insurrection, in the year one 	1
who had been confined to his bed for three months by 	1
who had been more accustomed to peace, still pre- 	1
who had discovered the warmest attachment to the 	1
who had enjoyed that dignity; and the ancient, but 	1
who had hitherto continued inexorable to every treaty 	1
who had not yet acquired that delicacy of sentiment, 	1
who had rid her of an husband, whom she had so vio- 	1
who had served in Scotland, dissuaded Mary from all 	1
who had totally renounced their ecclesiastical character. 	1
who hath examined this point with his usual acuteness 	1
who have been the greatest reproach to human nature. 	1
who have rendered themselves illustrious, by the at- 	1
who, having violated every thing venerable and sacred 	1
who, if any rupture should happen with England, will 	1
who, in expectation of meeting him, had already come 	1
whole church." 	1
whole extent of his favour. He affected to talk often 	1
whole force against that kingdom. 	1
whole had been a fiction of his own, or of Murray, it is impossible that he 	1
whole transaction both to the king and to the queen- 	1
whole weight of her vengeance. For this purpose she 	1
whole weight of priestly authority was opposed, there 	1
wholly into the hands of the congregation ; that limited 	1
wholly to the influence of their ordinary agents ; but, 	1
whom he accused, upon oath, of being the author of 	1
whom he could confide l . ' In order to form the appear- 	1
whom he had engaged to assist, with many fair pro- 	1
whom he had great credit ; a warm partisan of France, 	1
whom he was seized informed him, that nothing' was 	1
whom he was so fond. But the story proves more serious 	1
whom he was so nearly allied, could not, without bring- 	1
whom I can often laugh with, whose style I can even 	1
whom, in their present disposition, a much smaller ac- an^ahiles 	1
whom Italy produced so many, about this period. A 	1
whom she considered as the authors of all her calamities, 	1
whom she favoured and courted more than ever ; with 	1
whom she had already suffered so many injuries, and 	1
whom she had given so many causes of offence. The 	1
whom she was obliged in decency to consult, were the 	1
whom that queen married after the death of her hus- 	1
whom the blow was aimed ; and in the utmost conster- 	1
whom the council, intrusted with supreme authority, 	1
whom they deemed the enemy of their families and the 	1
whom they placed the greatest confidence, gave vent to 	1
whom they were to appear, the high rank of the per- 	1
whom we find, as the most remarkable names, Adam 	1
who openly resorted thither, gave great offence to the 	1
who performed all religious offices, or must have fallen 	1
who scarce had the liberty of choice left, was persuaded 	1
who scrupled at nothing, however advantageous to that 	1
whose care he was committed, and conducted him into 	1
whose discipline he was indebted for all his conquests. 	1
who seemed, by some words in a speech, to glance at 	1
whose love she had already sacrificed so much a . If 	1
whose most indefatigable zeal could not satisfy the 	1
whose satisfaction she was willing to explain any part 	1
whose security, no less than her own, depended on 	1
whose splendid flowers burst quickly forth, and as 	1
whose superiority in cavalry could be of no benefit to 	1
whose system of reformation was so fatal to their power. 	1
whose undutiful behaviour rendered him odious to his 	1
who should presume to accuse him of being accessory 	1
who thereby precluded herself from disturbing Eliza- 	1
who told me, as I suspected, that the chaplains to forts and 	1
who took arms for the queen, and assisted her in de- 	1
who, under very difficult circumstances, had given 	1
who was desirous of securing his protection against the 	1
who was prompted, both by inclination and by interest, 	1
who were assembled by the queen regent at Newbattle, 	1
who were named as his accomplices ; he required that, 	1
who were now not only useless, but burthensome to the 	1
who were strangers to her councils, and obnoxious to 	1
wicked intentions displayed and aggravated, and every 	1
wick sallied out; interrupted the work; and ravaged 	1
wick's State Papers, i. 143.- Throkmorton, the English ambassador at 	1
wide and fertile, afforded settlements to a numerous 	1
wife, a woman capable of executing the commission 	1
wife was of the same blood. All these had warmly con- 	1
wifti contempt ; and that she would be careful to instil 	1
wild and enthusiastic phrensy in the human mind, this 	1
wild scheme, it was necessary to bring him to some 	1
Wilkie will be very much elevated by praise from an English 	1
will be far from treating the fears and caution of the 	1
will be fully sufficient for consulting such manuscripts 	1
will. Do you ask me about my course of life ? I can only 	1
will ever believe me, with great regard, 	1
WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D. 	1
William Robertson was born on the eighth of Sep- 	1
William Tytler, Adam Ferguson, etc. To this institu- 	1
willingly bestows on an enemy; The unhappy conse- 	1
willingness to pardon the offences which they had com- 	1
willingness to receive the former into favour ; towards 	1
willing to get rid of him with decency. Lennox soon 	1
will not, I hope, be very bulky ; but they will contribute, as 	1
will now be heightened by a sentiment of a more per- 	1
will with which you are pleased to instruct me in this curious 	1
winch gave rise to a practice so shocking to humanity age&gt; 	1
window towards the street; spread a featherbed on 	1
wisdom and to act with vigour. He declared against 	1
wisdom, are such as need not the heightenings of fic- 	1
wisdom, executed with vigour, and attended with suc- 	1
wisdom, they were able to execute with little vigour; 	1
wise derogatory from their royal dignity. Nothing is 	1
wise laws enacted ; and a nation flourishing and happy, 	1
wisely contrived, under various pretences, to detain 1566. 	1
wise politicians. Every step any prince took was ob- 	1
wished ; and his zeal for the protestant religion was not 	1
wished that they should make no slight impression on 	1
wished to entangle her. Mary expressed the utmost ~~ 	1
wishes of her subjects, and pressed by the strongest 	1
wishes to resist conviction, and to relieve itself by in- 	1
wish this be not the case, considering the testimony of Bu- 	1
witchcraft c . It was owing, however, to no other charm 	1
WITH 	1
with abundance of dexterity, to sooth the queen, and 	1
with a considerable body of their troops, and, falling 	1
with a few acts of severity a . 	1
with a foreigner; and, if the crown should be strength- 	1
with a hostile hand, and I had much rather that these were 	1
with a jealous attention, and secretly countenanced the 	1
with all her inclinations. The return of that nobleman 	1
with all his forces, he was too generous to abandon al- 	1
with all the indignity and rigour which the odious crime 	1
with amazement and sorrow; and we find Knox ex- 	1
with an army seven thousand strong. 	1
with an intention of soothing and silencing the clergy. 	1
with a number of men, in proportion to the extent of 	1
with a numerous train of vassals and dependants ; the 	1
with any probability of success, the nation declared in 	1
with any unequal share of the burthen, we may conclude 	1
with a pious industry, and from them gleaned materials 	1
with a single ship towards Norway. On that coast he 	1
with a very different reception. 	1
with a view of giving still farther satisfaction to the protestants, she de- 	1
with a view to which it seems manifestly to have been 	1
with becoming vigour. James and his counsellors, by 	1
with bitter complaints against the queen, for neglecting 	1
with care, and arranged with skill ; that the progress 	1
with care. I remembered that one of the wisest men 	1
with certainty concerning its nature or its cause 1 ". His 	1
with child. From this enumeration of circumstances, it appears almost 	1
with concern, and was at the utmost pains to obstruct 	1
with considerable utility. 	1
with Darnly. Murray had many reasons to hesitate, 	1
with decency, the time, the place, and the circumstances 	1
with disdain every proposal for dissolving their mar- 	1
with disdain. Happily for the queen, the sagacity and 	1
with dismal presages concerning the queen's marriage 	1
with dissimulation in this part of her conduct. Two mu atlon " 	1
withdrawn within the appointed time. The grievances 	1
with Edward ; the earl of Angus openly negotiated that 	1
with Edward the third, had not leisure to attend to the 	1
with Elizabeth ; and as Darnly professed the Roman 	1
with England; and the protector neglected the only 	1
with England, and to surrender some of the strongest 	1
with England, the queen represented that they could 	1
with England, upon terms of great advantage, did, at 	1
with England was of the last consequence to Francis 	1
with envy ; and regard the lazy and inactive character 	1
with events calculated to display its own antiquity and 	1
with every transaction in queen Mary's reign, and with how 	1
with extreme neglect. She had fully gained her end, jje 	1
with fidelity ; they carried on his measures with vigour, 	1
with France, and, above all these, the desire of recover- 	1
with fresh importunity, to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh. 	1
With great consideration, 	1
with greater ... . . J 	1
with having obtained an hereditary right to their fiefs, 	1
with hearing your praises so often sounded, and that 	1
with her, and communicated to her all their designs'". 	1
with her, is addressed directly to Elizabeth l , that dex- 	1
with him into his retreat the love of his friends, the 	1
with his demands. At the same time she was in- 	1
with his situation : nevertheless some of his friends so- 	1
with his usual timidity, under the terrour of approach- 	1
with how little safety to himself, or success to his cause, 	1
with impatience. But it was impossible to overturn, in 	1
Within a few days the French had their full revenge ; 	1
within his territory before them, the lord of regality 	1
within sight, and she continued to feed her melancholy 	1
within three miles of that place ; and that a parliament 	1
with it, she gave him letters, warmly recommending his 	1
with judgment, to which there are few equals. They 	1
with lady Jane Gordon was unlawful and void, and she considered them as 	1
with less opposition into a throne, when almost vacant; 	1
with life ; but the last words I utter, shall be those of 	1
with little exactness, and the ministers were kept in the 	1
with little state ; armed guards standing at the doors 	1
with many expressions full of contempt both for Mary's 	1
with many of the most eminent among the French no- 	1
with many other instances of the same crime, the causes assassina- 	1
with money and a strong body of troops. La Mothe, 	1
with more enlarged notions in religion, the reformation fn J ^viTa 	1
with most advantage. A war on the borders of that 	1
with much attention and gratitude. You have set me fight 	1
with no other intention, revealed all the circumstances 	1
without absence, to raise some commotions. Before he set out, 	1
without any form of trial, hanged them instantly over a 	1
without any other support or recommendation, than the 	1
without any scruple : at present, it seems to me that you have 	1
without attempting to convince their sovereign by ar- 	1
without delay, convoyed the queen into France. Mary 	1
without drawing aid from every quarter. By procuring 	1
without experience, without allies, and almost without 	1
without great offence. Notwithstanding the popular 	1
without hesitation, accepted the offers of the Scottish 	1
without injustice, to both queens. " There was nei- 	1
without knowledge or experience in the art of war, are 	1
without lessening the dignity of a prince, steals on the 	1
without making some attempt towards delineating his 	1
without manifest danger and imprudence. She had 	1
without necessity, in a state of suspense; and hinted 	1
without noise, or meeting with any resistance, seized 	1
without notes, then followed in the Scottish pulpits; 	1
without observation, to an unexpected height and vi- 	1
without shaking off their allegiance ; and, as no time 	1
without success. Lennox, who seems, as well as his 	1
without taking pains to insinuate himself into favour ; 	1
without the former, foreign transactions must be alto- 	1
Without the invidious name of protector, he succeeded 	1
without venturing upon any decision of much import- 	1
without which it was impossible, in that age, to gain an 	1
with persons of the most consummate experience in the 	1
with perspicuity and force. 	1
with pleasure, during my life, that I shall travel down to 	1
with power to impose a tax on such boroughs as had no ministers, for rais- 	1
with propriety, and from the envy which their prefer- measures. 	1
with rebels, as a condescension unsuitable to the dignity 	1
with regard the queen s assent to the laws establishing the protes- 	1
with regard The vigorous zeal of the parliament overturned, in a 	1
with regard to another point, they found the zeal of 	1
With regard to each of these, the Scots obtained Artifices of 	1
with regard to her conduct. He recommended the 	1
With regard to my present work, I am inclined to believe 	1
with regard to that problematical passage in the Scot- 	1
with regard to the right of succession operated for 	1
with regard to the various revolutions in the govern- 	1
with regard to which she demanded some time for 	1
with reputation, and with success. James no longer 	1
with resentment and impatient for revenge, rash ex- 	1
with respect to the act of the nineteenth of April, 1 567 ; but 	1
with respect to the murder remained untouched, these 	1
with respect to the other public papers of that period. 	1
with respect to the points in controversy, which did not 	1
with respect to the suppressing of popery, the encou- 	1
with respect to the treaty, continued to urge her, by 1561. 	1
with severity. Every accusation against persons of rank 	1
with some bitterness, the king's ingratitude, the jea- 	1
with so much art and industry ; and flattered themselves 	1
with so much impartiality, he repressed the licentious 	1
with so much splendour e . The sudden removal of the 	1
withstanding all her efforts to assume the gaiety which 	1
withstanding her seeming impartiality, she had no~ j^~ 	1
withstand its efforts. But as Mary had submitted her 	1
withstand the influence of France, and the address of 	1
with subordination, and disdaining the restraints of law 	1
with such an army, encouraged by her presence and au- 	1
with such circumstances. 	1
with such circumstances, as encouraged the insolence 	1
with such emotions .of mind as are not easily described. 	1
with temper. His resentment against one party of the 	1
with terrour, and their forfeiture added vast possessions 	1
with that honour and authority of which she herself 	1
with that of a servant who slept in the same room, 	1
with the affection of friends. In the other feudal king- 	1
with the beauty of his person. Of a weak understand- 	1
with the blood of their common enemy, or whether the 	1
with the calamities which had befallen the kingdom, 	1
with the candour natural to a generous mind, confessed 	1
with the chiefs of the congregation. These two noble- 	1
with the clergy and with the people, as might induce 	1
with the command of the principal fortress in the king- 1559. 	1
with the credulity natural to those who are passionately 	1
with the emperor's proposals, rejected them with de- 	1
with the fondest credulity trusted to the frail security 	1
with the greatest appearance of unanimity. But the 	1
with the Greek and Roman authors, who described 	1
with the imputation of imaginary crimes*. 	1
with their last breath, any knowledge of the crime for 	1
with the king c . The whole body of the nobles long 	1
with the king her son ; or at least be allowed to reside 	1
with them, and that they would listen to none of his 	1
with the most eminent persons ot that party; not a 	1
with the most indecent remissness, and in such a man- 	1
with the names of Robertson and Hume ; and provided I 	1
with the prospect ; and, as long as her eyes could dis- 	1
with the prospect of protection, would refuse to listen 	1
with the queen concerning her past conduct, and 	1
with the queen's favour, he began already to assume 	1
with the regent. Argyll, Huntly, and Herries, acknow- 	1
withThe re- powerful and most popular man in England. His wife 	1
with the same affection which distinguished the first 	1
with the same rapidity, towards Edinburgh, which the 	1
with the same reserve; and, with more security and 	1
with these, and what Scottish forces she could levy of 	1
with the sense of danger, in extinguishing among them 	1
with the title of duke of Chatelherault in that kingdom. 	1
with the*utmost dissatisfaction. About three hundred 	1
with the utmost expedition, along with Darnly, to the 	1
with the utmost impatience. Fortune soothed her on 	1
with the utmost industry, in drawing together his ad- 	1
with the utmost precipitation, and in a dreadful season, 	1
with the utmost rigour of law. But, in praise of her 	1
with the utmost vigour in all his designs towards pro- 	1
with the utmost zeal ; and the protestants, averse from 	1
with the warmest love of civil liberty, which they con- 	1
with this precarious tenure, by which they held their 	1
with this, prince, she entered into a still closer connexion with 	1
With this view, she instantly despatched lord Scrope, 	1
With this view, they determined to petition the parlia- 	1
with those of other nations, all the means for extending 	1
with unsuspicious admiration, or heard with implicit 	1
with which Scotland was intimately connected, little gather 	1
with which she married a man stained with so many 	1
with which, under the veil of friendship, she had been 	1
with which unmerited prosperity inspires an ignoble 	1
with you, that we possess at this time very great advan- 	1
with zeal into the measures of their sovereign for the 	1
wives and children in the heart of Scotland, growing 	1
w Keith, 329. Id. App. 165, 166. Knox, 404. The eagerness of the 	1
w ll^tf with no less activity, and with much more success. 	1
WM. ROBERTSON, D.D. 	1
woman, be condemned for listening to so equitable a 	1
woman of the age, to carry away this prize from so 	1
woman, who boasted daily of being the lawful wife of 	1
wonderfully slow. The long continuance, however, of 	1
wonderfully upon the people, who, unless then* jea- 	1
work as they were printed off. I shall insert an extract 	1
work ; Casteln. 462. ; and that she rejoiced at the accomplishment of it, 	1
work. Dr. Blair urged him to undertake a complete 	1
work. Every thing has been done which was so natu- 	1
work into English, to translate anew all my philosophical 	1
WORKS 	1
work seldom stray beyond his own bosom, a pleasing 	1
work upon the regent's jealousy and fear ; but, as he 	1
work with fifty puerilities. 	1
world ; he himself seems indeed to have been satisfied 	1
world ; the seizing and fortifying towns in different 	1
worse means, or reaped from them less satisfaction. 	1
worthy minion. Even in the queen's presence they 	1
worthy objects. 	1
worthy of credit. These broken fragments John de 	1
worthy of wearing a crown, and to declare that she 	1
would accrue to the public, by a proper application of 	1
would arise from an inquiry into the conduct of the 	1
would, at length, triumph both over the maxims of 	1
would be amusing to inquire what a different direction 	1
would be ineffectual, and that their passions were too 	1
would be inevitable, and he would justly merit it at her 	1
would be made the pretext or occasion of perpetual 	1
would be more at his command than an undisciplined 	1
would be no difficult matter to prevail on them to pe- 	1
would condescend to no compliances. The leading 	1
would employ their interest towards reinstating him in 	1
would excite, could not fail of making many converts 	1
would expose herself by such an indecent choice ; but 	1
would expose his person, by venturing so far into Eng- 	1
would expose the person offending to certain punish- 	1
would gladly have soothed the queen, by addresses 	1
would have appeared so obvious and natural. 	1
would have applauded and seconded his efforts to re- 	1
would have approved. She outlived, in a great mea- 	1
would have easily forced her way into the town, if the 	1
would have enabled her to protract the negotiation at 	1
would have mass free for all men that would hear it. Good. vol. i. 274. 	1
would have moved any such difficulty, had not em- 	1
would have rendered the prospect of her succession less 	1
would have united in their defence. In this situation, 	1
would have ventured to go dangerous lengths; and, 	1
would have willingly made many concessions to the 	1
would honour and obey her as their sovereign y . 	1
would induce me to break in upon a field of which he 	1
would inspire her friends with new zeal and courage ; 	1
would never burthen her own conscience with the guilt 	1
would never forgive a man, who had endeavoured to 	1
would never permit him to return into Scotland; and, 	1
would not even intrust them with the command of the 	1
would not presume to publish without your permission, though 	1
would not scruple, if Dr. Robertson would undertake 	1
would render action necessary. The princes of Lor- 	1
would render her hereafter dependent, not only upon 	1
would satisfy the people than a resolution to drop the 	1
would second any attempt he might make to recover 	1
would so soon come to so disgraceful an end. I happened a 	1
would suffer by the offence which her apostacy must 	1
would the jealousy of their subjects have permitted such 	1
would think they were wanting in the most indispensable 	1
would undertake the History of England. But as Mr. 	1
would wish to give an accurate and rational account of the 	1
would wish to see the subject treated with extraordi- 	1
wreak its utmost fury upon all who were suspected of 	1
wrest from them what they had usurped during that 	1
wresting the sceptre' out of her hands, or condemning 	1
wrest the earldom of Angus out of their hands. But 	1
write downward. For when you find occasion, by new dis- 	1
writers, he was at the utmost pains to adorn them ; and 	1
writers of that age, and with which both the historians of the city of Edin- 	1
writers tax with great irregularities b , governed the 	1
writers themselves think it incumbent on them to pay 	1
writings into French. He says, that none of them are well 	1
written to one, his most intimate friend, in his corre- 	1
wrongs ; and thus assassination, a crime of all others 	1
wrongs greater; or let me receive from your hands 	1
wrongs. James, who was not ignorant that all these 	1
wrote with his own hand, and kept in the Scots college. I 	1
wth Eng- S pi ra t ors&lt; Those ministers of Henry the eighth, who 	1
wTth'nfgard tic l e of religion employed longer time, and was attended 	1
x Anders, vol. i. 106. 	1
x Anders, vol. iv. part i. 94. 	1
xii THE LIFE OF 	1
xiv THE LIFE OF 	1
xl DR. ROBERTSON'S 	1
xlii DR. ROBERTSON'S 	1
xliv DR. ROBERTSON'S 	1
xlvi DR. ROBERTSON'S 	1
xlviii DR. ROBERTSON'S 	1
x THE LIFE OF 	1
xviii THE LIFE OF 	1
xvi THE LIFE OF 	1
xxii THE LIFE OF 	1
xxiv THE LIFE OF 	1
XXIX. 	1
xx THE LIFE OF 	1
xxviii THE LIFE OF * 	1
xxvi THE LIFE OF 	1
xxx. ch. 20, etc. 	1
xxxii DR. ROBERTSON'S 	1
xxxiv DR. ROBERTSON'S 	1
xxxvi DR. ROBERTSON'S 	1
xxxviii DR. ROBERTSON'S 	1
Y 2 	1
y Act 44. Parl. 1455. 	1
y Anders. 3. 84. ' Jebb, ii. 263. 	1
year became remarkable for the most violent eruptions 	1
year, for the despatch of whatever business the general 	1
year. New complaints were made, and upon good J^ c- 2 ^- 	1
year one thousand five hundred and sixty, and com- 	1
year one thousand five hundred and sixty. The pro- 	1
years, Bruce and his posterity kept possession of the 	1
years. His wife, lady Margaret Douglas, was Mary's 	1
year would not permit her land army to take the field ; 	1
yet answer nothing. I have the strangest reluctance to change 	1
yet I own that I was very uneasy at finding myself under a 	1
yet it looks too like a puff. I send it to you, not only that 	1
y Haynes, 211. 	1
yield to every thing which was required, and to sign all 	1
y Keith, 345. 347. * Ibid. 353. Good. vol. i. 302. 	1
yond Forth, left the other nobles to contend for offices 	1
you, and that you enterprize nothing but what you shall see may be easily 	1
You are so kind as to ask me about my coming down. I can 	1
you a trifling temporary production, made for the occa- 	1
you be so good as to assure Dr. A. Smith of my regard and 	1
You conclude in the note, vol. i. p. 307, in favour of her 	1
you deny me that honour ! God forbid that I should 	1
you desired him to apply to me in order to point out the pas- 	1
you for the honour done me in it, as well as for so valuable a 	1
you give him. I need not say how sensible I am of the good- 	1
You have given authenticity and order to a period of our 	1
you have published already is a sure sign of the reception 	1
you honour, as I imagined, in choosing you, preferably 	1
you may do me the favour to correct any inaccuracies in the 	1
you may perhaps expect also some seasoning of the 	1
young and tender heart. Darnly grew giddy with his 	1
younger sons in the army ; his eldest daughter married 	1
youngest son, and that was easily suppressed. The 	1
young king was the only thing wanting, to fix and per- 	1
young monarch, by electing him a knight of the Golden 	1
young nobleman, as we have already observed, con- 	1
young prince was a security for the continuance of this 	1
young prince was to be proclaimed king ; and the earl 	1
your approbation, be so good as to let me know. Please to 	1
your excellent history ; and the satisfaction which I have re- 	1
your favour ; and I console myself with the snug con- 	1
your friends. I consulted immediately with general Conway, 	1
your hath too upon the same authority. I will see you 	1
your highness herewith, and, according to his request, have taken order for 	1
your History of Charles the fifth will meet with in the conti- 	1
your library, and I natter myself you will be so good as to 	1
Your lordship's most obedient 	1
your lordship will pardon the liberty I have taken. I have 	1
your majesty's pleasure therein, and what supportation and maintenance 	1
your majesty would minister unto them, after the execution of the same, in 	1
Your most obedient and faithful servant, 	1
Your most obedient and humble servant, 	1
Your most obedient and most humble servant. 	1
your opinion, somebody else whom you trusted might be em- 	1
Yours sincerely, 	1
your thrusting me out of my place in Paris as well as at 	1
your wish, that I should not write this period. I could not 	1
you said, with many additions and amplifications. I desired 	1
you see, in a panegyric on the people ; but you would sus- 	1
youth, and the support of the poor, was equally dreaded 	1
you the same service, if my leisure permit me, as I hope it 	1
you to make remarks as you go along. It would have been 	1
you treat it with great propriety, and in my opinion with suf- 	1
you was pleased to make me, and apply to you for such books 	1
y Spots. Hist, of the Church of Scotland, 449. 	1
zabeth ; and, by venturing, notwithstanding the incle- 	1
zabeth and familiarity with Elizabeth, employed Maitland to desire 	1
zabeth ; but a transaction of so much importance did 	1
zabeth had so nTUch at heart, her commands were 	1
zabeth, having established a fact so unfavourable to 	1
zabeth, in order to make this protestation, privately 	1
zabeth. land of Lethington, the ambassadors of the parliament, 	1
zabeth's former promises, Mary had reason to expect 	1
zabeth was obliged to break that unaccountable silence 	1
zeal. Each of these produced historians of consider- 	1
zeal for popery, opposition to the court, and commi- 	1
zeal for the old doctrines history records,' were present in those meetings of 	1
zeal for were renewed. The reply which the queen made to 	1
zeal had engaged them in an undertaking, which it was The con _ 	1
zeal of her adherents must have gradually cooled ; and 	1
zeal of his associates, by his representations of the 	1
zeal of the Roman catholics got the start of the prior, 	1
zealous and impatient spirit of the age broke out in a 	1
zealous patron of popery in that age. Nothing could 	1
zeal; succours might arrive from other parts of the 	1
zeal to evaporate, she called into her presence a certain 	1
zeal which the catholic nobles had for their religion. Besides the pre- 	1
zeal, which was still in its full strength ; they dreaded 	1
zeal with which the duke of Chatelherault and his son, 	1
zeal with which they espoused the defence of a cause 	1
zen of Edinburgh, both nations took arms, with equal 	1
zens ; and the aid of the secular power concurred with 	1
z Good. vol. ii. 160. Anders, vol. iii. 24. 	1
z How far this claim of the clergy to exemption from lay jurisdiction ex- 	1
